22. Int J Med Inform. 2018 Dec;120:14-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.09.009. Epub 
2018 Sep 15.

Challenges optimizing the after visit summary.

Federman A(1), Sarzynski E(2), Brach C(3), Francaviglia P(4), Jacques J(4), 
Jandorf L(5), Munoz AS(6), Wolf M(7), Kannry J(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
alex.federman@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Center for Delivery, Organization, and Markets, Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, Rockville, MD, USA.
(4)Epic Clinical Transformation Group, Information Technology Department, Mount 
Sinai Health System, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(6)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The after visit summary (AVS) is a paper or electronic document 
given to patients after a medical appointment, which is intended to summarize 
patients' health and guide future care, including self-management tasks.
OBJECTIVE: To describe experiences of health systems implementing a redesigned 
outpatient AVS in commercially available electronic health record (EHR) systems 
to inform future optimization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted semi-structured interviews with information 
technology and clinical leaders at 12 hospital and community-based healthcare 
institutions across the continental United States focusing on the process of AVS 
redesign and implementation. We also report our experience implementing a 
redesigned AVS in the Epic EHR at the Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City, NY.
RESULTS: Health systems experienced many challenges implementing the redesigned 
AVS. While many IT leaders noted that the redesigned AVS is easier to understand 
and the document is better organized, they claim the effort is time-consuming, 
Epic system upgrades render AVS modifications non-functional, and primary care 
and specialty practices have different needs in regards to content and 
formatting. Our team was able to modify the document by changing the order of 
print groups, modifying the font size, bolding section headers, and inserting 
page breaks. Similar to other health systems, our team found that it is 
difficult to achieve some desired features due to limitations in the EHR 
platform.
CONCLUSION: Health IT leaders view the AVS as a valuable source of information 
for patients. However, limitations to AVS modifications in EHR systems present 
challenges to optimizing the tool. EHR vendors should incorporate learning from 
healthcare systems innovation efforts and consider building more flexibility 
into their product development.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.09.009
PMCID: PMC6326571
PMID: 30409339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.