625. Int J Med Inform. 2020 Jun 8;141:104197. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2020.104197. 
Online ahead of print.

Decentralised provenance for healthcare data.

Margheri A(1), Masi M(2), Miladi A(3), Sassone V(4), Rosenzweig J(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. 
Electronic address: a.margheri@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Tiani "Spirit" Gmbh, DC Tower 1, Donau-City-Straße 7, 1220 Vienna, Austria. 
Electronic address: massimiliano.masi@tiani-spirit.com.
(3)Tiani "Spirit" Gmbh, DC Tower 1, Donau-City-Straße 7, 1220 Vienna, Austria. 
Electronic address: abdallah.miladi@tiani-spirit.com.
(4)University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. 
Electronic address: vsassone@soton.ac.uk.
(5)Cisco Healthcare, USA. Electronic address: jason.rosenzweig@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: The creation and exchange of patients' Electronic Healthcare Records 
have developed significantly in the last decade. Patients' records are however 
distributed in data silos across multiple healthcare facilities, posing 
technical and clinical challenges that may endanger patients' safety. Current 
healthcare sharing systems ensure interoperability of patients' records across 
facilities, but they have limits in presenting doctors with the clinical context 
of the data in the records. We design and implement a platform for managing 
provenance tracking of Electronic Healthcare Records based on blockchain 
technology, compliant with the latest healthcare standards and following the 
patient-informed consent preferences.
METHODS: The platform leverages two pillars: the use of international standards 
such as Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE), Health Level Seven 
International (HL7) and Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) to 
achieve interoperability, and the use of a provenance creation process that 
by-design, avoids personal data storage within the blockchain. The platform 
consists of: (1) a smart contract implemented within the Hyperledger Fabric 
blockchain that manages provenance according to the W3C PROV for medical 
document in standardised formats (e.g. a CDA document, a FHIR resource, a DICOM 
study, etc.); (2) a Java Proxy that intercepts all the document submissions and 
retrievals for which provenance shall be evaluated; (3) a service used to 
retrieve the PROV document.
RESULTS: We integrated our decentralised platform with the SpiritEHR engine, an 
enterprise-grade healthcare system, and we stored and retrieved the available 
documents in the Mandel's sample CDA repository,1 which contained no protected 
health information. Using a cloud-based blockchain solution, we observed that 
the overhead added to the typical processing time of reading and writing medical 
data is in the order of milliseconds. Moreover, the integration of the Proxy at 
the level of exchanged messages in EHR systems allows transparent usage of 
provenance data in multiple health computing domains such as decision making, 
data reconciliation, and patient consent auditing.
CONCLUSIONS: By using international healthcare standards and a cloud-based 
blockchain deployment, we delivered a solution that can manage provenance of 
patients' records via transparent integration within the routine operations on 
healthcare data.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2020.104197
PMID: 32540775