574. JMIR Med Inform. 2014 Mar 18;2(1):e5. doi: 10.2196/medinform.3172.

Next generation phenotyping using the unified medical language system.

Adamusiak T(1), Shimoyama N, Shimoyama M.

Author information:
(1)Human and Molecular Genetics Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI, United States. tomasz@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: Structured information within patient medical records represents a 
largely untapped treasure trove of research data. In the United States, privacy 
issues notwithstanding, this has recently become more accessible thanks to the 
increasing adoption of electronic health records (EHR) and health care data 
standards fueled by the Meaningful Use legislation. The other side of the coin 
is that it is now becoming increasingly more difficult to navigate the profusion 
of many disparate clinical terminology standards, which often span millions of 
concepts.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of our study was to develop a methodology for 
integrating large amounts of structured clinical information that is both 
terminology agnostic and able to capture heterogeneous clinical phenotypes 
including problems, procedures, medications, and clinical results (such as 
laboratory tests and clinical observations). In this context, we define 
phenotyping as the extraction of all clinically relevant features contained in 
the EHR.
METHODS: The scope of the project was framed by the Common Meaningful Use (MU) 
Dataset terminology standards; the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine 
Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT), RxNorm, the Logical Observation Identifiers Names 
and Codes (LOINC), the Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), the Health care 
Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS), the International Classification of 
Diseases Ninth Revision Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM), and the International 
Classification of Diseases Tenth Revision Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM). The 
Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) was used as a mapping layer among the MU 
ontologies. An extract, load, and transform approach separated original 
annotations in the EHR from the mapping process and allowed for continuous 
updates as the terminologies were updated. Additionally, we integrated all 
terminologies into a single UMLS derived ontology and further optimized it to 
make the relatively large concept graph manageable.
RESULTS: The initial evaluation was performed with simulated data from the 
Clinical Avatars project using 100,000 virtual patients undergoing a 90 day, 
genotype guided, warfarin dosing protocol. This dataset was annotated with 
standard MU terminologies, loaded, and transformed using the UMLS. We have 
deployed this methodology to scale in our in-house analytics platform using 
structured EHR data for 7931 patients (12 million clinical observations) treated 
at the Froedtert Hospital. A demonstration limited to Clinical Avatars data is 
available on the Internet using the credentials user "jmirdemo" and password 
"jmirdemo".
CONCLUSIONS: Despite its inherent complexity, the UMLS can serve as an effective 
interface terminology for many of the clinical data standards currently used in 
the health care domain.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.3172
PMCID: PMC4288084
PMID: 25601137

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.