319. FASEB J. 2013 Sep;27(9):3437-45. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-222653. Epub 2013 May 22.

Anti-interleukin-5 and multiple autoantibodies are associated with human 
atherosclerotic diseases and serum interleukin-5 levels.

Ishigami T(1), Abe K, Aoki I, Minegishi S, Ryo A, Matsunaga S, Matsuoka K, 
Takeda H, Sawasaki T, Umemura S, Endo Y.

Author information:
(1)Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Science and Cardio-renal Medicine, 3-9, Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama-city, 
Kanagawa-ken, 236-0004, Japan. tommmish@hotmail.com

Atherosclerotic diseases, such as coronary artery disease and peripheral artery 
disease, are systemic disorders and among the leading causes of mortality and 
morbidity throughout the world. However, the exact pathophysiological mechanisms 
underlying the development of atherosclerosis remain unknown; currently, 
atherosclerosis is thought to involve an inflammatory process. Systemic 
inflammatory reactions and accumulation of immune cells in atherosclerotic 
lesions in situ are considered essential. We have comprehensively analyzed 
autoantibodies in patients with atherosclerosis by means of a newly developed 
high-throughput autoantibody analysis system. A wide range of autoantibodies was 
found in sera from patients with atherosclerosis. After we statistically 
analyzed the titers of each autoantibody with conventional techniques, the 
results underwent text-mining analyses based on natural language processing. 
Combinatory analysis revealed a close association between anti-interleukin 
(IL)-5 antibody and atherosclerosis. Titers of anti-IL-5 antibodies and serum 
IL-5 concentrations were also closely associated with other risk factors, such 
as low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, serum creatinine, fasting plasma 
glucose, gender, and age, suggesting that suppressed IL-5 function mediated by 
autoantibodies in patients with atherosclerosis plays an important role in the 
disease process. To validate the clinical significance of these findings, we 
computed the specificity and sensitivity of titers of anti-IL-5 autoantibodies 
for human atherosclerosis. When antibody titers of 1.49 were assumed to predict 
the presence of atherosclerosis, the sensitivity was 95.0% and the specificity 
91.0%, with an area under the curve of 0.940. Our results provide important 
clues to understanding the role of autoantibody-mediated immune reactions in 
human atherosclerosis and suggest novel therapeutic opportunities for management 
of the disease.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.12-222653
PMID: 23699176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]