423. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2015 Dec;62(12):2776-86. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2015.2450181. 
Epub 2015 Jun 26.

METEOR: An Enterprise Health Informatics Environment to Support Evidence-Based 
Medicine.

Puppala M, He T, Chen S, Ogunti R, Yu X, Li F, Jackson R, Wong ST.

GOAL: The aim of this paper is to propose the design and implementation of 
next-generation enterprise analytics platform developed at the Houston Methodist 
Hospital (HMH) system to meet the market and regulatory needs of the healthcare 
industry.
METHODS: For this goal, we developed an integrated clinical informatics 
environment, i.e., Methodist environment for translational enhancement and 
outcomes research (METEOR). The framework of METEOR consists of two components: 
the enterprise data warehouse (EDW) and a software intelligence and analytics 
(SIA) layer for enabling a wide range of clinical decision support systems that 
can be used directly by outcomes researchers and clinical investigators to 
facilitate data access for the purposes of hypothesis testing, cohort 
identification, data mining, risk prediction, and clinical research training.
RESULTS: Data and usability analysis were performed on METEOR components as a 
preliminary evaluation, which successfully demonstrated that METEOR addresses 
significant niches in the clinical informatics area, and provides a powerful 
means for data integration and efficient access in supporting clinical and 
translational research.
CONCLUSION: METEOR EDW and informatics applications improved outcomes, enabled 
coordinated care, and support health analytics and clinical research at HMH.
SIGNIFICANCE: The twin pressures of cost containment in the healthcare market 
and new federal regulations and policies have led to the prioritization of the 
meaningful use of electronic health records in the United States. EDW and SIA 
layers on top of EDW are becoming an essential strategic tool to healthcare 
institutions and integrated delivery networks in order to support evidence-based 
medicine at the enterprise level.

DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2015.2450181
PMID: 26126271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]