618. JMIR Res Protoc. 2013 Jul 10;2(2):e23. doi: 10.2196/resprot.2644.

EBMPracticeNet: A Bilingual National Electronic Point-Of-Care Project for 
Retrieval of Evidence-Based Clinical Guideline Information and Decision Support.

Van de Velde S(1), Vander Stichele R, Fauquert B, Geens S, Heselmans A, 
Ramaekers D, Kunnamo I, Aertgeerts B.

Author information:
(1)EBMPracticeNet, Leuven, Belgium. stijn.vandevelde@med.kuleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: In Belgium, the construction of a national electronic point-of-care 
information service, EBMPracticeNet, was initiated in 2011 to optimize quality 
of care by promoting evidence-based decision-making. The collaboration of the 
government, health care providers, evidence-based medicine (EBM) partners, and 
vendors of electronic health records (EHR) is unique to this project. All 
Belgian health care professionals get free access to an up-to-date database of 
validated Belgian and nearly 1000 international guidelines, incorporated in a 
portal that also provides EBM information from other sources than guidelines, 
including computerized clinical decision support that is integrated in the EHRs.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this paper was to describe the development strategy, 
the overall content, and the management of EBMPracticeNet which may be of 
relevance to other health organizations creating national or regional electronic 
point-of-care information services.
METHODS: Several candidate providers of comprehensive guideline solutions were 
evaluated and one database was selected. Translation of the guidelines to Dutch 
and French was done with translation software, post-editing by translators and 
medical proofreading. A strategy is determined to adapt the guideline content to 
the Belgian context. Acceptance of the computerized clinical decision support 
tool has been tested and a randomized controlled trial is planned to evaluate 
the effect on process and patient outcomes.
RESULTS: Currently, EBMPracticeNet is in "work in progress" state. Reference is 
made to the results of a pilot study and to further planned research including a 
randomized controlled trial.
CONCLUSIONS: The collaboration of government, health care providers, EBM 
partners, and vendors of EHRs is unique. The potential value of the project is 
great. The link between all the EHRs from different vendors and a national 
database held on a single platform that is controlled by all EBM organizations 
in Belgium are the strengths of EBMPracticeNet.

DOI: 10.2196/resprot.2644
PMCID: PMC3713937
PMID: 23842038

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: RVS is the salaried 
Project Leader, SVDV is the salaried Editor-in-Chief, and AH is a salaried 
Editor for EBMPracticeNet. BA and SG are founding members of EBMPracticeNet. BF 
is president of the EBMPracticeNet board and is salaried editor of 
EBMPracticeNet. DR is board member of CEBAM. IK is the salaried Chief Editor of 
EBM Guidelines and EBMeDS decision support service.