372. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2013 Dec;20(e2):e341-8. doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001939. 
Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Normalization and standardization of electronic health records for 
high-throughput phenotyping: the SHARPn consortium.

Pathak J(1), Bailey KR, Beebe CE, Bethard S, Carrell DC, Chen PJ, Dligach D, 
Endle CM, Hart LA, Haug PJ, Huff SM, Kaggal VC, Li D, Liu H, Marchant K, Masanz 
J, Miller T, Oniki TA, Palmer M, Peterson KJ, Rea S, Savova GK, Stancl CR, Sohn 
S, Solbrig HR, Suesse DB, Tao C, Taylor DP, Westberg L, Wu S, Zhuo N, Chute CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVE: To develop scalable informatics infrastructure for 
normalization of both structured and unstructured electronic health record (EHR) 
data into a unified, concept-based model for high-throughput phenotype 
extraction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Software tools and applications were developed to extract 
information from EHRs. Representative and convenience samples of both structured 
and unstructured data from two EHR systems-Mayo Clinic and Intermountain 
Healthcare-were used for development and validation. Extracted information was 
standardized and normalized to meaningful use (MU) conformant terminology and 
value set standards using Clinical Element Models (CEMs). These resources were 
used to demonstrate semi-automatic execution of MU clinical-quality measures 
modeled using the Quality Data Model (QDM) and an open-source rules engine.
RESULTS: Using CEMs and open-source natural language processing and terminology 
services engines-namely, Apache clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction 
System (cTAKES) and Common Terminology Services (CTS2)-we developed a 
data-normalization platform that ensures data security, end-to-end connectivity, 
and reliable data flow within and across institutions. We demonstrated the 
applicability of this platform by executing a QDM-based MU quality measure that 
determines the percentage of patients between 18 and 75 years with diabetes 
whose most recent low-density lipoprotein cholesterol test result during the 
measurement year was <100 mg/dL on a randomly selected cohort of 273 Mayo Clinic 
patients. The platform identified 21 and 18 patients for the denominator and 
numerator of the quality measure, respectively. Validation results indicate that 
all identified patients meet the QDM-based criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: End-to-end automated systems for extracting clinical information 
from diverse EHR systems require extensive use of standardized vocabularies and 
terminologies, as well as robust information models for storing, discovering, 
and processing that information. This study demonstrates the application of 
modular and open-source resources for enabling secondary use of EHR data through 
normalization into standards-based, comparable, and consistent format for 
high-throughput phenotyping to identify patient cohorts.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001939
PMCID: PMC3861933
PMID: 24190931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]