429. J Biomed Inform. 2009 Oct;42(5):790-800. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2008.12.011. Epub 
2009 Jan 4.

Towards identifying intervention arms in randomized controlled trials: 
extracting coordinating constructions.

Chung GY(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Health Informatics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 
2052, Australia. gigigraceyc@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Large numbers of reports of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are 
published each year, and it is becoming increasingly difficult for clinicians 
practicing evidence-based medicine to find answers to clinical questions. The 
automatic machine extraction of RCT experimental details, including design 
methodology and outcomes, could help clinicians and reviewers locate relevant 
studies more rapidly and easily.
AIM: This paper investigates how the comparison of interventions is documented 
in the abstracts of published RCTs. The ultimate goal is to use automated text 
mining to locate each intervention arm of a trial. This preliminary work aims to 
identify coordinating constructions, which are prevalent in the expression of 
intervention comparisons.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An analysis of the types of constructs that describe the 
allocation of intervention arms is conducted, revealing that the compared 
interventions are predominantly embedded in coordinating constructions. A method 
is developed for identifying the descriptions of the assignment of treatment 
arms in clinical trials, using a full sentence parser to locate coordinating 
constructions and a statistical classifier for labeling positive examples. 
Predicate-argument structures are used along with other linguistic features with 
a maximum entropy classifier. An F-score of 0.78 is obtained for labeling 
relevant coordinating constructions in an independent test set.
CONCLUSIONS: The intervention arms of a randomized controlled trials can be 
identified by machine extraction incorporating syntactic features derived from 
full sentence parsing.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2008.12.011
PMID: 19166975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]