20. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2019 Aug;3:1-11. doi: 10.1200/CCI.19.00006.

Enhancing Case Capture, Quality, and Completeness of Primary Melanoma Pathology 
Records via Natural Language Processing.

Malke JC(1), Jin S(1), Camp SP(1), Lari B(1), Kell T(1), Simon JM(1), Prieto 
VG(1), Gershenwald JE(1), Haydu LE(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

PURPOSE: Medical records contain a wealth of useful, informative data points 
valuable for clinical research. Most data points are stored in semistructured or 
unstructured legacy documents and require manual data abstraction into a 
structured format to render the information more readily accessible, searchable, 
and generally analysis ready. The substantial labor needed for this can be cost 
prohibitive, particularly when dealing with large patient cohorts.
METHODS: To establish a high-throughput approach to data abstraction, we 
developed a novel framework using natural language processing (NLP) and a 
decision-rules algorithm to extract, transform, and load (ETL) melanoma primary 
pathology features from pathology reports in an institutional legacy electronic 
medical record system into a structured database. We compared a subset of these 
data with a manually curated data set comprising the same patients and developed 
a novel scoring system to assess confidence in records generated by the 
algorithm, thus obviating manual review of high-confidence records while 
flagging specific, low-confidence records for review.
RESULTS: The algorithm generated 368,624 individual melanoma data points 
comprising 16 primary tumor prognostic factors and metadata from 23,039 
patients. From these data points, a subset of 147,872 was compared with an 
existing, manually abstracted data set, demonstrating an exact or synonymous 
match between 90.4% of all data points. Additionally, the confidence-scoring 
algorithm demonstrated an error rate of only 3.7%.
CONCLUSION: Our NLP platform can identify and abstract melanoma primary 
prognostic factors with accuracy comparable to that of manual abstraction (< 5% 
error rate), with vastly greater efficiency. Principles used in the development 
of this algorithm could be expanded to include other melanoma-specific data 
points as well as disease-agnostic fields and further enhance capture of 
essential elements from nonstructured data.

DOI: 10.1200/CCI.19.00006
PMID: 31442076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]