411. Res Synth Methods. 2019 Sep;10(3):420-439. doi: 10.1002/jrsm.1350. Epub 2019 Jun 
2.

Potential Technologies Review: A hybrid information retrieval framework to 
accelerate demand-pull innovation in biomedical engineering.

Schmitz T(1), Bukowski M(1), Koschmieder S(2), Schmitz-Rode T(3), Farkas R(1).

Author information:
(1)Science Management, Institute of Applied Medical Engineering, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Applied Medical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.

Publisher: Launching biomedical innovations based on clinical demands instead of 
translating basic research findings to practice reduces the risk that the 
results will not fit the clinical routine. To realize this type of innovation, a 
meta-analysis of the body of research is necessary to reveal demand-matching 
concepts. However, both the data deluge and the narrow time constraints for 
innovation make it impossible to perform such reviews manually. Thus, this paper 
proposes a specifically adapted “Potential Technologies Review” approach 
focusing on automated text mining and information retrieval techniques. The 
novel framework combines features from both systematic and scoping reviews. It 
aims at high coverage and reproducibility while mapping technologies-even with a 
fuzzy initial scope. To achieve these goals for search and triage, a set of 
closely interrelated methods has been developed: (a) automated query 
optimization, (b) screening prioritization, and (c) recall estimation. To 
determine appropriate parameters, a variety of published literature corpora were 
used and compared with an evaluation on a real-world dataset. Our results show 
that it is feasible to automate the identification of relevant works using this 
newly introduced framework. It achieved a workload reduction of up to 91% 
“Work-saved-over Sampling (WSS)” with a 76% overall recall compared with 
manually screening search results. Reducing the workload is a prerequisite for a 
rapid Potential Technologies Review when conducting demand-pull innovations. 
Moreover, it facilitates the updating and closer monitoring of latest findings. 
Studying the robustness of the framework and expanding it to patent documents 
are future tasks.

DOI: 10.1002/jrsm.1350
PMID: 30995361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]