591. J Registry Manag. 2014 Summer;41(2):51-6.

Enhancing central cancer registry treatment data using physician medical claims: 
a Florida pilot project.

Hernandez MN, MacKinnon JA, Penberthy L, Bonner J, Huang YX.

BACKGROUND: To capture the complete first course of therapy and cancer 
incidence, given the shift in cancer care from the hospital to the private 
physician practice, central cancer registries (CCRs) in the United States are 
actively pursuing cancer reporting from ambulatory providers. The 837 medical 
health claim is a national standard which CCRs can use to capture and translate 
data into standardized cancer reporting for surveillance.
METHODS: The Florida Cancer Data System conducted a pilot project with a large 
medical oncology practice to transmit electronic claims from 2011 to 2013. Using 
the logic and platform developed under a previous National Cancer Institute 
(NCI) contract, claims were consolidated and translated into standardized cancer 
registry codes. Consolidated physician claims were compared against gold 
standard data from the practice electronic health record (EHR) and evaluated for 
enhancement to registry data.
RESULTS: A total of 623 patient tumor cases were collected from the practice EHR 
and matched to the physician claims data, and to the original cancer registry 
record. The claims captured 256 cases (41 percent) with chemotherapy, compared 
to 28 percent in the registry data set, and 45 percent in the gold standard EHR 
data set. Combining physician claims with registry data produced 280 cases (45 
percent) with chemotherapy. The physician claims plus the registry cancer 
chemotherapy treatment data produced 92 percent agreement, 92 percent 
sensitivity, and 91 percent positive predictive value. Claims added 103 cases, 
or 16.5 percent, to the total chemotherapy received.
CONCLUSIONS: Physician medical claims data capture chemotherapy information not 
otherwise reported by hospitals, and is a standardized and efficient mechanism 
for cancer reporting.

PMID: 25153009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]