133. Bioinformatics. 2019 Nov 1;35(21):4372-4380. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz227.

Open Agile text mining for bioinformatics: the PubAnnotation ecosystem.

Kim JD(1), Wang Y(1), Fujiwara T(1), Okuda S(2), Callahan TJ(3), Cohen KB(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Database Center for Life Science, Research Organization of Information and 
Systems, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Niigata, 
Japan.
(3)Computational Bioscience Program, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Université Paris-Saclay, LIMSI-ILES, France.

MOTIVATION: Most currently available text mining tools share two characteristics 
that make them less than optimal for use by biomedical researchers: they require 
extensive specialist skills in natural language processing and they were built 
on the assumption that they should optimize global performance metrics on 
representative datasets. This is a problem because most end-users are not 
natural language processing specialists and because biomedical researchers often 
care less about global metrics like F-measure or representative datasets than 
they do about more granular metrics such as precision and recall on their own 
specialized datasets. Thus, there are fundamental mismatches between the 
assumptions of much text mining work and the preferences of potential end-users.
RESULTS: This article introduces the concept of Agile text mining, and presents 
the PubAnnotation ecosystem as an example implementation. The system approaches 
the problems from two perspectives: it allows the reformulation of text mining 
by biomedical researchers from the task of assembling a complete system to the 
task of retrieving warehoused annotations, and it makes it possible to do very 
targeted customization of the pre-existing system to address specific end-user 
requirements. Two use cases are presented: assisted curation of the GlycoEpitope 
database, and assessing coverage in the literature of pre-eclampsia-associated 
genes.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The three tools that make up the ecosystem, 
PubAnnotation, PubDictionaries and TextAE are publicly available as web 
services, and also as open source projects. The dictionaries and the annotation 
datasets associated with the use cases are all publicly available through 
PubDictionaries and PubAnnotation, respectively.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz227
PMCID: PMC6821251
PMID: 30937439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]