217. JMIR Res Protoc. 2019 May 7;8(5):e11448. doi: 10.2196/11448.

The Adverse Drug Reactions From Patient Reports in Social Media Project: 
Protocol for an Evaluation Against a Gold Standard.

Arnoux-Guenegou A(1), Girardeau Y(1)(2), Chen X(1), Deldossi M(3), Aboukhamis 
R(4), Faviez C(5), Dahamna B(6), Karapetiantz P(1), Guillemin-Lanne S(3), 
Lillo-Le Louët A(4), Texier N(5), Burgun A(1)(2)(7), Katsahian S(1)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U1138 - Team 22, Information Sciences to Support Personalized 
Medicine, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France.
(2)Département d'Informatique Médicale, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, 
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Innovative Projects - Text Mining, Expert System, Paris, France.
(4)Centre Régional de Pharmacovigilance, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, 
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(5)Kappa Santé, Paris, France.
(6)Service d'Informatique Biomédicale, D2IM, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Rouen, Rouen, France.
(7)INSERM U1138 - Team 22, Information Sciences to Support Personalized 
Medicine, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(8)Clinical Research Unit Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Ouest, Hôpital Européen 
Georges-Pompidou, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(9)INSERM CIC1418, Clinical Epidemiology, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, 
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Social media is a potential source of information on postmarketing 
drug safety surveillance that still remains unexploited nowadays. Information 
technology solutions aiming at extracting adverse reactions (ADRs) from posts on 
health forums require a rigorous evaluation methodology if their results are to 
be used to make decisions. First, a gold standard, consisting of manual 
annotations of the ADR by human experts from the corpus extracted from social 
media, must be implemented and its quality must be assessed. Second, as for 
clinical research protocols, the sample size must rely on statistical arguments. 
Finally, the extraction methods must target the relation between the drug and 
the disease (which might be either treated or caused by the drug) rather than 
simple co-occurrences in the posts.
OBJECTIVE: We propose a standardized protocol for the evaluation of a software 
extracting ADRs from the messages on health forums. The study is conducted as 
part of the Adverse Drug Reactions from Patient Reports in Social Media project.
METHODS: Messages from French health forums were extracted. Entity recognition 
was based on Racine Pharma lexicon for drugs and Medical Dictionary for 
Regulatory Activities terminology for potential adverse events (AEs). Natural 
language processing-based techniques automated the ADR information extraction 
(relation between the drug and AE entities). The corpus of evaluation was a 
random sample of the messages containing drugs and/or AE concepts corresponding 
to recent pharmacovigilance alerts. A total of 2 persons experienced in medical 
terminology manually annotated the corpus, thus creating the gold standard, 
according to an annotator guideline. We will evaluate our tool against the gold 
standard with recall, precision, and f-measure. Interannotator agreement, 
reflecting gold standard quality, will be evaluated with hierarchical kappa. 
Granularities in the terminologies will be further explored.
RESULTS: Necessary and sufficient sample size was calculated to ensure 
statistical confidence in the assessed results. As we expected a global recall 
of 0.5, we needed at least 384 identified ADR concepts to obtain a 95% CI with a 
total width of 0.10 around 0.5. The automated ADR information extraction in the 
corpus for evaluation is already finished. The 2 annotators already completed 
the annotation process. The analysis of the performance of the ADR information 
extraction module as compared with gold standard is ongoing.
CONCLUSIONS: This protocol is based on the standardized statistical methods from 
clinical research to create the corpus, thus ensuring the necessary statistical 
power of the assessed results. Such evaluation methodology is required to make 
the ADR information extraction software useful for postmarketing drug safety 
surveillance.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): RR1-10.2196/11448.

©Armelle Arnoux-Guenegou, Yannick Girardeau, Xiaoyi Chen, Myrtille Deldossi, Rim 
Aboukhamis, Carole Faviez, Badisse Dahamna, Pierre Karapetiantz, Sylvie 
Guillemin-Lanne, Agnès Lillo-Le Louët, Nathalie Texier, Anita Burgun, Sandrine 
Katsahian. Originally published in JMIR Research Protocols 
(http://www.researchprotocols.org), 07.05.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/11448
PMCID: PMC6528435
PMID: 31066711

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.