327. Int J Med Inform. 2009 Dec;78(12):e47-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2009.03.010. 
Epub 2009 May 15.

Classifying disease outbreak reports using n-grams and semantic features.

Conway M(1), Doan S, Kawazoe A, Collier N.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan. mike@nii.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: This paper explores the benefits of using n-grams and semantic 
features for the classification of disease outbreak reports, in the context of 
the BioCaster disease outbreak report text mining system. A novel feature of 
this work is the use of a general purpose semantic tagger - the USAS tagger - to 
generate features.
BACKGROUND: We outline the application context for this work (the BioCaster 
epidemiological text mining system), before going on to describe the 
experimental data used in our classification experiments (the 1000 document 
BioCaster corpus). FEATURE SETS: Three broad groups of features are used in this 
work: Named Entity based features, n-gram features, and features derived from 
the USAS semantic tagger.
METHODOLOGY: Three standard machine learning algorithms - Naïve Bayes, the 
Support Vector Machine algorithm, and the C4.5 decision tree algorithm - were 
used for classifying experimental data (that is, the BioCaster corpus). Feature 
selection was performed using the chi(2) feature selection algorithm. Standard 
text classification performance metrics - Accuracy, Precision, Recall, 
Specificity and F-score - are reported.
RESULTS: A feature representation composed of unigrams, bigrams, trigrams and 
features derived from a semantic tagger, in conjunction with the Naïve Bayes 
algorithm and feature selection yielded the highest classification accuracy (and 
F-score). This result was statistically significant compared to a baseline 
unigram representation and to previous work on the same task. However, it was 
feature selection rather than semantic tagging that contributed most to the 
improved performance.
CONCLUSION: This study has shown that for the classification of disease outbreak 
reports, a combination of bag-of-words, n-grams and semantic features, in 
conjunction with feature selection, increases classification accuracy at a 
statistically significant level compared to previous work in this domain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2009.03.010
PMID: 19447070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]