351. Int J Med Inform. 2015 Oct;84(10):763-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2015.06.002. 
Epub 2015 Jun 10.

CER Hub: An informatics platform for conducting comparative effectiveness 
research using multi-institutional, heterogeneous, electronic clinical data.

Hazlehurst BL(1), Kurtz SE(2), Masica A(3), Stevens VJ(2), McBurnie MA(2), Puro 
JE(4), Vijayadeva V(5), Au DH(6), Brannon ED(7), Sittig DF(8).

Author information:
(1)Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Center for Health Research, Portland, OR, USA. 
Electronic address: Brian.hazlehurst@kpchr.org.
(2)Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Center for Health Research, Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Baylor Scott & White Health, Center for Clinical Effectiveness, Dallas, TX, 
USA.
(4)OCHIN Inc, Portland, OR, USA.
(5)Kaiser Permanente Hawaii, Center for Health Research, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(6)VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Kaiser Permanente Southeast, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(8)University of Texas Health Science Center, School of Biomedical Informatics, 
Houston, TX, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Comparative effectiveness research (CER) requires the capture and 
analysis of data from disparate sources, often from a variety of institutions 
with diverse electronic health record (EHR) implementations. In this paper we 
describe the CER Hub, a web-based informatics platform for developing and 
conducting research studies that combine comprehensive electronic clinical data 
from multiple health care organizations.
METHODS: The CER Hub platform implements a data processing pipeline that employs 
informatics standards for data representation and web-based tools for developing 
study-specific data processing applications, providing standardized access to 
the patient-centric electronic health record (EHR) across organizations.
RESULTS: The CER Hub is being used to conduct two CER studies utilizing data 
from six geographically distributed and demographically diverse health systems. 
These foundational studies address the effectiveness of medications for 
controlling asthma and the effectiveness of smoking cessation services delivered 
in primary care.
DISCUSSION: The CER Hub includes four key capabilities: the ability to process 
and analyze both free-text and coded clinical data in the EHR; a data processing 
environment supported by distributed data and study governance processes; a 
clinical data-interchange format for facilitating standardized extraction of 
clinical data from EHRs; and a library of shareable clinical data processing 
applications.
CONCLUSION: CER requires coordinated and scalable methods for extracting, 
aggregating, and analyzing complex, multi-institutional clinical data. By 
offering a range of informatics tools integrated into a framework for conducting 
studies using EHR data, the CER Hub provides a solution to the challenges of 
multi-institutional research using electronic medical record data.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2015.06.002
PMID: 26138036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]