11. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Dec;100:103324. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103324. Epub 2019 
Oct 31.

DiseaSE: A biomedical text analytics system for disease symptom extraction and 
characterization.

Abulaish M(1), Parwez MA(2), Jahiruddin(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, South Asian University, Delhi, India. 
Electronic address: abulaish@sau.ac.in.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi, India. 
Electronic address: aslamparwez.jmi@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi, India. 
Electronic address: jahiruddin@jmi.ac.in.

Due to increasing volume and unstructured nature of the scientific literatures 
in biomedical domain, most of the information embedded within them remain 
untapped. This paper presents a biomedical text analytics system, DiseaSE 
(Disease Symptom Extraction), to identify and extract disease symptoms and their 
associations from biomedical text documents retrieved from the PubMed database. 
It implements various NLP and information extraction techniques to convert text 
documents into record-size information components that are represented as 
semantic triples and processed using TextRank and other ranking techniques to 
identify feasible disease symptoms. Eight different diseases, including dengue, 
malaria, cholera, diarrhoea, influenza, meningitis, leishmaniasis, and kala-azar 
are considered for experimental evaluation of the proposed DiseaSE system. On 
analysis, we found that the DiseaSE system is able to identify new symptoms that 
are even not catalogued on standard websites such as Center for Disease Control 
(CDC), World Health Organization (WHO), and National Health Survey (NHS). The 
proposed DiseaSE system also aims to compile generic associations between a 
disease and its symptoms, and presents a graph-theoretic analysis and 
visualization scheme to characterize disease at different levels of granularity. 
The identified disease symptoms and their associations could be useful to 
generate a biomedical knowledgebase (e.g., a disease ontology) for the 
development of e-health and disease surveillance systems.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103324
PMID: 31678590