433. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2020 Aug;22(8):570-576. doi: 10.1089/dia.2019.0377. Epub 
2020 Jul 10.

Integrating Continuous Glucose Monitor Data Directly into the Electronic Health 
Record: Proof of Concept.

Espinoza J(1)(2), Shah P(1), Raymond J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California.

Background: Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems are widely and 
increasingly used in diabetes self-management and in the context of clinic 
visits. However, access to CGM data during visits can be challenging. Clinic 
inefficiencies can restrict the time available for patient education, and the 
inability to integrate CGM data into electronic health record (EHR) systems can 
result in data being lost. In this study, we describe our institution's approach 
to integrating CGM data directly into the EHR through a partnership with a CGM 
device manufacturer and without a third-party data aggregation/data 
visualization platform. Methods: We interviewed key stakeholders with the 
hospital Information Technology Department, the Division of Pediatric 
Endocrinology, and a CGM device manufacturer. A collaborative, human-centered 
design approach was used to define the workflow. Health Level 7 (HL7) standards 
were used to build all data exchanges. Results: In collaboration with all 
parties, we created a simple network architecture design for both account 
linkage and data acquisition. The system uses the standard, computerized, 
physician order entry interface available in the EHR for both processes. Data 
acquisition occurs in real time, and customized reports are displayed within the 
results section of the EHR. The entire process is Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant and meets all security requirements. 
Conclusions: Building scalable data integration using HL7 standards is possible 
and allows real-time access to CGM data within the diabetes provider's existing 
workflow and can occur with or without the patient present. This may lead to 
improved clinical outcomes, increased efficiency, and new revenue opportunities 
by documenting CGM data capture and review.

DOI: 10.1089/dia.2019.0377
PMID: 31904260