545. BMC Health Serv Res. 2017 Feb 6;17(1):117. doi: 10.1186/s12913-017-2049-y.

Addressing the gaps in diabetes care in first nations communities with the 
reorganizing the approach to diabetes through the application of registries 
(RADAR): the project protocol.

Eurich DT(1)(2), Majumdar SR(3)(4), Wozniak LA(5)(3), Soprovich A(5)(3), Meneen 
K(6), Johnson JA(5)(3), Samanani S(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1C9, 
Canada. deurich@ualberta.ca.
(2)Alliance for Canadian Heath Outcomes Research in Diabetes, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E1, Canada. deurich@ualberta.ca.
(3)Alliance for Canadian Heath Outcomes Research in Diabetes, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E1, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2R7, Canada.
(5)School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1C9, 
Canada.
(6)OKAKI Health Intelligence Inc, #715, 3553 - 31st NW, Calgary, AB, T2L 2K7, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Type-2 diabetes rates in First Nations communities are 3-5 times 
higher than the general Canadian population, resulting in a high burden of 
disease, complications and comorbidity. Limited community nursing capacity, 
isolated environments and a lack of electronic health records (EHR)/registries 
lead to a reactive, disorganized approach to diabetes care for many First 
Nations people. The Reorganizing the Approach to Diabetes through the 
Application of Registries (RADAR) project was developed in alignments with 
federal calls for innovative, culturally relevant, community-specific programs 
for people with type-2 diabetes developed and delivered in partnership with 
target communities.
METHODS: RADAR applies both an integrated diabetes EHR/registry system (CARE 
platform) and centralized care coordinator (CC) service that will support local 
healthcare. The CC will work with local healthcare workers to support patient 
and community health needs (using the CARE platform) and build capacity in best 
practices for type-2 diabetes management. A modified stepped wedge controlled 
trial design will be used to evaluate the model. During the baseline phase, the 
CC will work with local healthcare workers to identify patients with type-2 
diabetes and register them into the CARE platform, but not make any management 
recommendations. During the intervention phase, the CC will work with local 
healthcare workers to proactively manage patients with type-2 diabetes, 
including monitoring and recall of patients, relaying clinical information and 
coordinating care, facilitated through the shared use of the CARE platform. The 
RE-AIM framework will provide a comprehensive assessment of the model. The 
primary outcome measure will be a 10% improvement in any one of A1c, BP, or 
cholesterol over the baseline values. Secondary endpoints will address other 
diabetes care indicators including: the proportion of clinical measures 
completed in accordance with guidelines (e.g., foot and eye examination, receipt 
of vaccinations, smoking cessation counseling); the number of patients 
registered in CARE; and the proportion of patients linked to a health services 
provider. The cost-effectiveness of RADAR specific to these communities will be 
assessed. Concurrent qualitative assessments will provide contextual 
information, such as the quality/usability of the CARE platform and the 
impact/satisfaction with the model.
DISCUSSION: RADAR combines innovative technology with personalized support to 
deliver organized diabetes care in remote First Nations communities in Alberta. 
By improving the ability of First Nations to systematically identify and track 
diabetes patients and share information seamlessly an overall improvement in the 
quality of clinical care of First Nations people living with type-2 diabetes on 
reserve is anticipated.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ISRCTN study ID ISRCTN14359671 , retrospectively registered 
October 7, 2016.

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-017-2049-y
PMCID: PMC5294874
PMID: 28166804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]