509. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):127-135. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz172.

A step closer to nationwide electronic health record-based chronic disease 
surveillance: characterizing asthma prevalence and emergency department 
utilization from 100 million patient records through a novel multisite 
collaboration.

Tarabichi Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Goyden J(1)(2), Liu R(5)(6), Lewis S(5)(6), Sudano 
J(3)(6), Kaelber DC(1)(2)(3)(7)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical Informatics Research and Education, The MetroHealth 
System, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, The MetroHealth System, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The MetroHealth System, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Center for Healthcare Research and Policy, The MetroHealth System, Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, The MetroHealth System, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The study sought to assess the feasibility of nationwide chronic 
disease surveillance using data aggregated through a multisite collaboration of 
customers of the same electronic health record (EHR) platform across the United 
States.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An independent confederation of customers of the same EHR 
platform proposed and guided the development of a program that leverages native 
EHR features to allow customers to securely contribute de-identified data 
regarding the prevalence of asthma and rate of asthma-associated emergency 
department visits to a vendor-managed repository. Data were stratified by state, 
age, sex, race, and ethnicity. Results were qualitatively compared with national 
survey-based estimates.
RESULTS: The program accumulated information from 100 million health records 
from over 130 healthcare systems in the United States over its first 14 months. 
All states were represented, with a median coverage of 22.88% of an estimated 
state's population (interquartile range, 12.05%-42.24%). The mean monthly 
prevalence of asthma was 5.27 ± 0.11%. The rate of asthma-associated emergency 
department visits was 1.39 ± 0.08%. Both measures mirrored national survey-based 
estimates.
DISCUSSION: By organizing the program around native features of a shared EHR 
platform, we were able to rapidly accumulate population level measures from a 
sizeable cohort of health records, with representation from every state. The 
resulting data allowed estimates of asthma prevalence that were comparable to 
data from traditional epidemiologic surveys at both geographic and demographic 
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our initiative demonstrates the potential of intravendor customer 
collaboration and highlights an organizational approach that complements other 
data aggregation efforts seeking to achieve nationwide EHR-based chronic disease 
surveillance.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz172
PMID: 31592525