247. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2020 May;188:105264. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105264. Epub 2019 Dec 10.

Boosting ICD multi-label classification of health records with contextual 
embeddings and label-granularity.

Blanco A(1), Perez-de-Viñaspre O(2), Pérez A(2), Casillas A(2).

Author information:
(1)IXA Taldea. UPV-EHU, Manuel Lardizabal Ibilbidea, 1, Donostia 20018, Spain. 
Electronic address: ablanco061@ikasle.ehu.eus.
(2)IXA Taldea. UPV-EHU, Manuel Lardizabal Ibilbidea, 1, Donostia 20018, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: This work deals with clinical text mining, a field of 
Natural Language Processing applied to biomedical informatics. The aim is to 
classify Electronic Health Records with respect to the International 
Classification of Diseases, which is the foundation for the identification of 
international health statistics, and the standard for reporting diseases and 
health conditions. Within the framework of data mining, the goal is the 
multi-label classification, as each health record has assigned multiple 
International Classification of Diseases codes. We investigate five Deep 
Learning architectures with a dataset obtained from the Basque Country Health 
System, and six different perspectives derived from shifts in the input and the 
output.
METHODS: We evaluate a Feed Forward Neural Network as the baseline and several 
Recurrent models based on the Bidirectional GRU architecture, putting our 
research focus on the text representation layer and testing three variants, from 
standard word embeddings to meta word embeddings techniques and contextual 
embeddings.
RESULTS: The results showed that the recurrent models overcome the non-recurrent 
model. The meta word embeddings techniques are capable of beating the standard 
word embeddings, but the contextual embeddings exhibit as the most robust for 
the downstream task overall. Additionally, the label-granularity alone has an 
impact on the classification performance.
CONCLUSIONS: The contributions of this work are a) a comparison among five 
classification approaches based on Deep Learning on a Spanish dataset to cope 
with the multi-label health text classification problem; b) the study of the 
impact of document length and label-set size and granularity in the multi-label 
context; and c) the study of measures to mitigate multi-label text 
classification problems related to label-set size and sparseness.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105264
PMID: 31851906

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.