592. JMIR Res Protoc. 2020 Jan 2;9(1):e14525. doi: 10.2196/14525.

A Pain eHealth Platform for Engaging Obese, Older Adults with Chronic Low Back 
Pain in Nonpharmacological Pain Treatments: Protocol for a Pilot Feasibility 
Study.

Brooks AK(1), Miller DP Jr(2), Fanning JT(3)(4), Suftin EL(5), Reid MC(6), Wells 
BJ(5), Leng X(5), Hurley RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem, 
NC, United States.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston Salem, NC, United States.
(3)Department of Health and Exercise Science, Wake Forest University, Winston 
Salem, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Gerontology and Geriatric 
Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem, NC, United States.
(5)Division of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston 
Salem, NC, United States.
(6)Division of Geriatric and Palliative Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, United States.

BACKGROUND: Low back pain is a costly healthcare problem and the leading cause 
of disability among adults in the United States. Primary care providers urgently 
need effective ways to deliver evidence-based, nonpharmacological therapies for 
chronic low back pain. Guidelines published by several government and national 
organizations have recommended nonpharmacological and nonopioid pharmacological 
therapies for low back pain.
OBJECTIVE: The Pain eHealth Platform (PEP) pilot trial aims to test the 
feasibility of a highly innovative intervention that (1) uses an electronic 
health record (EHR) query to systematically identify a phenotype of obese, older 
adults with chronic low back pain who may benefit from Web-based behavioral 
treatments; (2) delivers highly tailored messages to eligible older adults with 
chronic low back pain via the patient portal; (3) links affected patients to a 
Web app that provides education on the efficacy of evidence-based, 
nonpharmacological, behavioral pain treatments; and (4) directs patients to 
existing Web-based health treatment tools.
METHODS: Using a three-step modified Delphi method, an expert panel of primary 
care providers will define a low back pain phenotype for an EHR query. Using the 
defined low back pain phenotype, an EHR query will be created to identify 
patients who may benefit from the PEP. Up to 15 patients with low back pain will 
be interviewed to refine the tailored messaging, esthetics, and content of the 
patient-facing Web app within the PEP. Up to 10 primary care providers will be 
interviewed to better understand the facilitators and barriers to implementing 
the PEP, given their clinic workflow. We will assess the feasibility of the PEP 
in a single-arm pragmatic pilot study in which secure patient portal invitations 
containing a hyperlink to the PEP Web app are sent to 1000 patients. The primary 
outcome of the study is usability as measured by the System Usability Scale.
RESULTS: Qualitative interviews with primary care providers were completed in 
April 2019. Qualitative interviews with patients will begin in December 2019.
CONCLUSIONS: The PEP will leverage informatics and the patient portal to deliver 
evidence-based nonpharmacological treatment information to adults with chronic 
low back pain. Results from this study may help inform the development of 
Web-based health platforms for other pain and chronic health conditions.
INTERNATIONAL REGISTERED REPORT IDENTIFIER (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/14525.

©Amber K Keller Brooks, David P Miller Jr, Jason T Fanning, Erin L Suftin, M 
Carrington Reid, Brian J Wells, Xiaoyan Leng, Robert W Hurley. Originally 
published in JMIR Research Protocols (http://www.researchprotocols.org), 
02.01.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/14525
PMCID: PMC6966554
PMID: 31895042

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.