282. JMIR Res Protoc. 2017 Jan 19;6(1):e3. doi: 10.2196/resprot.5948.

Leveraging Electronic Health Care Record Information to Measure Pressure Ulcer 
Risk in Veterans With Spinal Cord Injury: A Longitudinal Study Protocol.

Luther SL(1)(2), Thomason SS(1)(3), Sabharwal S(4), Finch DK(1), McCart J(1)(5), 
Toyinbo P(1), Bouayad L(1), Matheny ME(6)(7)(8)(9), Gobbel GT(7)(10), 
Powell-Cope G(1)(2)(11).

Author information:
(1)Center of Innovation on Disability and Rehabilitation Research, Health 
Services Research and Development, Department of Veterans Affairs, Tampa, FL, 
United States.
(2)College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United 
States.
(3)Tampa VA Research and Education Foundation, Inc, Tampa, FL, United States.
(4)VA Boston Healthcare System, VA New England Healthcare System, Department of 
Veterans Affairs, West Roxbury, MA, United States.
(5)Muma College of Business, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United 
States.
(6)Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical Care, Tennessee Valley Healthcare 
System, Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, TN, United States.
(7)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, United States.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN, United States.
(9)Division of General Internal Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, United States.
(10)Research and Development Service, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, TN, United States.
(11)College of Nursing, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, United States.

BACKGROUND: Pressure ulcers (PrUs) are a frequent, serious, and costly 
complication for veterans with spinal cord injury (SCI). The health care team 
should periodically identify PrU risk, although there is no tool in the 
literature that has been found to be reliable, valid, and sensitive enough to 
assess risk in this vulnerable population.
OBJECTIVE: The immediate goal is to develop a risk assessment model that validly 
estimates the probability of developing a PrU. The long-term goal is to assist 
veterans with SCI and their providers in preventing PrUs through an automated 
system of risk assessment integrated into the veteran's electronic health record 
(EHR).
METHODS: This 5-year longitudinal, retrospective, cohort study targets 12,344 
veterans with SCI who were cared for in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) 
in fiscal year (FY) 2009 and had no record of a PrU in the prior 12 months. 
Potential risk factors identified in the literature were reviewed by an expert 
panel that prioritized factors and determined if these were found in structured 
data or unstructured form in narrative clinical notes for FY 2009-2013. These 
data are from the VHA enterprise Corporate Data Warehouse that is derived from 
the EHR structured (ie, coded in database/table) or narrative (ie, text in 
clinical notes) data for FY 2009-2013.
RESULTS: This study is ongoing and final results are expected in 2017. Thus far, 
the expert panel reviewed the initial list of risk factors extracted from the 
literature; the panel recommended additions and omissions and provided insights 
about the format in which the documentation of the risk factors might exist in 
the EHR. This list was then iteratively refined through review and discussed 
with individual experts in the field. The cohort for the study was then 
identified, and all structured, unstructured, and semistructured data were 
extracted. Annotation schemas were developed, samples of documents were 
extracted, and annotations are ongoing. Operational definitions of structured 
data elements have been created and steps to create an analytic dataset are 
underway.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the largest cohort employed to identify 
PrU risk factors in the United States. It also represents the first time natural 
language processing and statistical text mining will be used to expand the 
number of variables available for analysis. A major strength of this 
quantitative study is that all VHA SCI centers were included in the analysis, 
reducing potential for selection bias and providing increased power for complex 
statistical analyses. This longitudinal study will eventually result in a risk 
prediction tool to assess PrU risk that is reliable and valid, and that is 
sensitive to this vulnerable population.

©Stephen L Luther, Susan S Thomason, Sunil Sabharwal, Dezon K Finch, James 
McCart, Peter Toyinbo, Lina Bouayad, Michael E Matheny, Glenn T Gobbel, Gail 
Powell-Cope. Originally published in JMIR Research Protocols 
(http://www.researchprotocols.org), 19.01.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/resprot.5948
PMCID: PMC5290296
PMID: 28104580

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.