606. Healthc Inform. 2011 Nov;28(11):8-10, 12-7.

Postcards from the imaging informatics road. Despite policy complexities, 
diagnostic imaging informatics makes progress on multiple fronts.

Hagland M.

The current strategic landscape for imaging informatics is one filled with great 
contrasts and paradoxes. On the one hand, because imaging informatics was not 
explicitly addressed in Stage 1 of the meaningful use requirements under the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act/Health Information Technology for 
Economic and Clinical Health Act (ARRA-HITECH) legislation, it instantly lost 
some of the environment of turbo-charged energy characterized by areas that were 
directly addressed by the HITECH Act, such as quality data reporting, care 
management, and of course, core electronic health record (EHR) development. On 
the other hand, an interesting combination of factors--rapidly advancing 
technology, the expansion of the image archiving concept across different 
medical specialties, and the inclusion of diagnostic image-sharing as one 
element in the development of health information exchange (HIE) arrangements 
nationwide--is nonetheless pushing imaging informatics forward towards new 
innovations. The five articles below provide readers with different glimpses of 
the path ahead for imaging informatics. The first presents a look at the current 
policy and reimbursement landscape. Each of the four subsequent articles delve 
into different aspects of innovation, from a process developed at a public 
hospital to improve and speed up the diagnostic process for trauma patients, to 
a radiology-specific financial analytics solution in the group practice setting, 
to an advance in cardiology information systems, to a self-developed federated 
image viewing platform at one of the nation's largest integrated health systems. 
Each of those initiatives is very different; yet it is clear that a great deal 
of innovation is taking place across the US. healthcare system when it comes to 
imaging informatics. With a landscape filled with uncertainties and potential 
policy, reimbursement, and industry shifts in the offing, CIOs, CMIOs, and other 
healthcare IT leaders will need to think very strategically where this critical 
area fits into their organizations' overall clinical IT strategies going 
forward.

PMID: 22125817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]