1. Int J Med Inform. 2019 May;125:37-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.02.008. Epub 
2019 Feb 20.

A systematic review of natural language processing and text mining of symptoms 
from electronic patient-authored text data.

Dreisbach C(1), Koleck TA(2), Bourne PE(3), Bakken S(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia, School of Nursing, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 
University of Virginia, Data Science Institute, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(2)Columbia University, School of Nursing, New York, NY, USA.
(3)University of Virginia, Data Science Institute, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 
University of Virginia, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Charlottesville, 
VA, USA.
(4)Columbia University, School of Nursing, New York, NY, USA; Columbia 
University, Department of Biomedical Informatics, New York, NY, USA; Columbia 
University, Data Science Institute, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
sbh22@cumc.columbia.edu.

OBJECTIVE: In this systematic review, we aim to synthesize the literature on the 
use of natural language processing (NLP) and text mining as they apply to 
symptom extraction and processing in electronic patient-authored text (ePAT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A comprehensive literature search of 1964 articles from 
PubMed and EMBASE was narrowed to 21 eligible articles. Data related to purpose, 
text source, number of users and/or posts, evaluation metrics, and quality 
indicators were recorded.
RESULTS: Pain (n = 18) and fatigue and sleep disturbance (n = 18) were the most 
frequently evaluated symptom clinical content categories. Studies accessed ePAT 
from sources such as Twitter and online community forums or patient portals 
focused on diseases, including diabetes, cancer, and depression. Fifteen studies 
used NLP as a primary methodology. Studies reported evaluation metrics including 
the precision, recall, and F-measure for symptom-specific research questions.
DISCUSSION: NLP and text mining have been used to extract and analyze 
patient-authored symptom data in a wide variety of online communities. Though 
there are computational challenges with accessing ePAT, the depth of information 
provided directly from patients offers new horizons for precision medicine, 
characterization of sub-clinical symptoms, and the creation of personal health 
libraries as outlined by the National Library of Medicine.
CONCLUSION: Future research should consider the needs of patients expressed 
through ePAT and its relevance to symptom science. Understanding the role that 
ePAT plays in health communication and real-time assessment of symptoms, through 
the use of NLP and text mining, is critical to a patient-centered health system.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.02.008
PMCID: PMC6438188
PMID: 30914179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST We have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.