149. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0122199. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122199. 
eCollection 2015.

Extraction of pharmacokinetic evidence of drug-drug interactions from the 
literature.

Kolchinsky A(1), Lourenço A(2), Wu HY(3), Li L(3), Rocha LM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 
USA; Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)ESEI: Escuela Superior de Ingeniería Informática, University of Vigo, 
Edificio Politécnico, Campus Universitario As Lagoas s/n 32004, Ourense, Spain; 
CEB-Centre of Biological Engineering, University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 
4710-057 Braga, Portugal.
(3)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics and Department of Medical 
& Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 
USA.

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality and a 
subject of intense scientific interest. Biomedical literature mining can aid DDI 
research by extracting evidence for large numbers of potential interactions from 
published literature and clinical databases. Though DDI is investigated in 
domains ranging in scale from intracellular biochemistry to human populations, 
literature mining has not been used to extract specific types of experimental 
evidence, which are reported differently for distinct experimental goals. We 
focus on pharmacokinetic evidence for DDI, essential for identifying causal 
mechanisms of putative interactions and as input for further pharmacological and 
pharmacoepidemiology investigations. We used manually curated corpora of PubMed 
abstracts and annotated sentences to evaluate the efficacy of literature mining 
on two tasks: first, identifying PubMed abstracts containing pharmacokinetic 
evidence of DDIs; second, extracting sentences containing such evidence from 
abstracts. We implemented a text mining pipeline and evaluated it using several 
linear classifiers and a variety of feature transforms. The most important 
textual features in the abstract and sentence classification tasks were 
analyzed. We also investigated the performance benefits of using features 
derived from PubMed metadata fields, various publicly available named entity 
recognizers, and pharmacokinetic dictionaries. Several classifiers performed 
very well in distinguishing relevant and irrelevant abstracts (reaching F1≈0.93, 
MCC≈0.74, iAUC≈0.99) and sentences (F1≈0.76, MCC≈0.65, iAUC≈0.83). We found that 
word bigram features were important for achieving optimal classifier performance 
and that features derived from Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms 
significantly improved abstract classification. We also found that some 
drug-related named entity recognition tools and dictionaries led to slight but 
significant improvements, especially in classification of evidence sentences. 
Based on our thorough analysis of classifiers and feature transforms and the 
high classification performance achieved, we demonstrate that literature mining 
can aid DDI discovery by supporting automatic extraction of specific types of 
experimental evidence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122199
PMCID: PMC4427505
PMID: 25961290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Coauthor Luis M. Rocha is a 
PLOS ONE Editorial Board member. This does not alter the authors' adherence to 
PLOS ONE editorial policies and criteria.