366. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Apr 23;9:207. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-207.

Extraction of semantic biomedical relations from text using conditional random 
fields.

Bundschus M(1), Dejori M, Stetter M, Tresp V, Kriegel HP.

Author information:
(1)Siemens AG, Corporate Technology, Information and Communications, 
Otto-Hahn-Ring 6, 81739 Munich, Germany. bundschu@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

BACKGROUND: The increasing amount of published literature in biomedicine 
represents an immense source of knowledge, which can only efficiently be 
accessed by a new generation of automated information extraction tools. Named 
entity recognition of well-defined objects, such as genes or proteins, has 
achieved a sufficient level of maturity such that it can form the basis for the 
next step: the extraction of relations that exist between the recognized 
entities. Whereas most early work focused on the mere detection of relations, 
the classification of the type of relation is also of great importance and this 
is the focus of this work. In this paper we describe an approach that extracts 
both the existence of a relation and its type. Our work is based on Conditional 
Random Fields, which have been applied with much success to the task of named 
entity recognition.
RESULTS: We benchmark our approach on two different tasks. The first task is the 
identification of semantic relations between diseases and treatments. The 
available data set consists of manually annotated PubMed abstracts. The second 
task is the identification of relations between genes and diseases from a set of 
concise phrases, so-called GeneRIF (Gene Reference Into Function) phrases. In 
our experimental setting, we do not assume that the entities are given, as is 
often the case in previous relation extraction work. Rather the extraction of 
the entities is solved as a subproblem. Compared with other state-of-the-art 
approaches, we achieve very competitive results on both data sets. To 
demonstrate the scalability of our solution, we apply our approach to the 
complete human GeneRIF database. The resulting gene-disease network contains 
34758 semantic associations between 4939 genes and 1745 diseases. The 
gene-disease network is publicly available as a machine-readable RDF graph.
CONCLUSION: We extend the framework of Conditional Random Fields towards the 
annotation of semantic relations from text and apply it to the biomedical 
domain. Our approach is based on a rich set of textual features and achieves a 
performance that is competitive to leading approaches. The model is quite 
general and can be extended to handle arbitrary biological entities and relation 
types. The resulting gene-disease network shows that the GeneRIF database 
provides a rich knowledge source for text mining. Current work is focused on 
improving the accuracy of detection of entities as well as entity boundaries, 
which will also greatly improve the relation extraction performance.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-207
PMCID: PMC2386138
PMID: 18433469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]