518. Methods Inf Med. 2011;50(2):140-9. doi: 10.3414/ME10-01-0022. Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Electronic health record interoperability as realized in the Turkish health 
information system.

Dogac A(1), Yuksel M, Avci A, Ceyhan B, Hülür U, Eryilmaz Z, Mollahaliloglu S, 
Atbakan E, Akdag R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, 
Turkey. asuman@srdc.com.tr

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this paper is to describe the techniques used in 
developing the National Health Information System of Turkey (NHIS-T), a 
nation-wide infrastructure for sharing electronic health records (EHRs).
METHODS: The UN/CEFACT Core Components Technical Specification (CCTS) 
methodology was applied to design the logical EHR structure and to increase the 
reuse of common information blocks in EHRs.
RESULTS: The NHIS-T became operational on January 15, 2009. By June 2010, 99% of 
the public hospitals and 71% of the private and university hospitals were 
connected to NHIS-T with daily feeds of their patients' EHRs. Out of the 72 
million citizens of Turkey, electronic healthcare records of 43 million citizens 
have already been created in NHIS-T. Currently, only the general practitioners 
can access the EHRs of their patients. In the second phase of the implementation 
and once the legal framework is completed, the proper patient consent mechanisms 
will be available through the personal health record system that is under 
development. At this time authorized healthcare professionals in secondary and 
tertiary healthcare systems can access the patients' EHRs.
CONCLUSIONS: A number of factors affected the successful implementation of 
NHIS-T. First, all stakeholders have to adopt the specified standards. Second, 
the UN/CEFACT CCTS approach was applied which facilitated the development and 
understanding of rather complex EHR schemas. Finally, the comprehensive testing 
of vendor-based hospital information systems for their conformance to and 
interoperability with NHIS-T through an automated testing platform enhanced 
substantially the fast integration of vendor-based solutions with the NHIS-T.

DOI: 10.3414/ME10-01-0022
PMID: 21132219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]