464. Methods Inf Med. 2006;45(4):343-53.

Semantic interoperability--HL7 Version 3 compared to advanced architecture 
standards.

Blobel BG(1), Engel K, Pharow P.

Author information:
(1)eHealth Competence Center, University of Regensburg Medical Center, 93042 
Regensburg, Germany. bernd.blobel@ehealth-cc.de

OBJECTIVES: To meet the challenge for high quality and efficient care, highly 
specialized and distributed healthcare establishments have to communicate and 
co-operate in a semantically interoperable way. Information and communication 
technology must be open, flexible, scalable, knowledge-based and 
service-oriented as well as secure and safe.
METHODS: For enabling semantic interoperability, a unified process for defining 
and implementing the architecture, i.e. structure and functions of the 
cooperating systems' components, as well as the approach for knowledge 
representation, i.e. the used information and its interpretation, algorithms, 
etc. have to be defined in a harmonized way. Deploying the Generic Component 
Model, systems and their components, underlying concepts and applied constraints 
must be formally modeled, strictly separating platform-independent from 
platform-specific models.
RESULTS: As HL7 Version 3 claims to represent the most successful standard for 
semantic interoperability, HL7 has been analyzed regarding the requirements for 
model-driven, service-oriented design of semantic interoperable information 
systems, thereby moving from a communication to an architecture paradigm. The 
approach is compared with advanced architectural approaches for information 
systems such as OMG's CORBA 3 or EHR systems such as GEHR/openEHR and CEN EN 
13606 Electronic Health Record Communication.
CONCLUSION: HL7 Version 3 is maturing towards an architectural approach for 
semantic interoperability. Despite current differences, there is a close 
collaboration between the teams involved guaranteeing a convergence between 
competing approaches.

PMID: 16964348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]