167. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Feb 1;27(2):315-329. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz162.

Mining social media for prescription medication abuse monitoring: a review and 
proposal for a data-centric framework.

Sarker A(1), DeRoos A(2), Perrone J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)College of Arts and Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Prescription medication (PM) misuse and abuse is a major health 
problem globally, and a number of recent studies have focused on exploring 
social media as a resource for monitoring nonmedical PM use. Our objectives are 
to present a methodological review of social media-based PM abuse or misuse 
monitoring studies, and to propose a potential generalizable, data-centric 
processing pipeline for the curation of data from this resource.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We identified studies involving social media, PMs, and 
misuse or abuse (inclusion criteria) from Medline, Embase, Scopus, Web of 
Science, and Google Scholar. We categorized studies based on multiple 
characteristics including but not limited to data size; social media source(s); 
medications studied; and primary objectives, methods, and findings.
RESULTS: A total of 39 studies met our inclusion criteria, with 31 (∼79.5%) 
published since 2015. Twitter has been the most popular resource, with Reddit 
and Instagram gaining popularity recently. Early studies focused mostly on 
manual, qualitative analyses, with a growing trend toward the use of 
data-centric methods involving natural language processing and machine learning.
DISCUSSION: There is a paucity of standardized, data-centric frameworks for 
curating social media data for task-specific analyses and near real-time 
surveillance of nonmedical PM use. Many existing studies do not quantify human 
agreements for manual annotation tasks or take into account the presence of 
noise in data.
CONCLUSION: The development of reproducible and standardized data-centric 
frameworks that build on the current state-of-the-art methods in data and text 
mining may enable effective utilization of social media data for understanding 
and monitoring nonmedical PM use.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz162
PMCID: PMC7025330
PMID: 31584645