629. J Med Internet Res. 2017 Aug 21;19(8):e294. doi: 10.2196/jmir.7881.

Development and Deployment of the OpenMRS-Ebola Electronic Health Record System 
for an Ebola Treatment Center in Sierra Leone.

Oza S(1)(2), Jazayeri D(3)(4), Teich JM(3)(5), Ball E(3)(6), Nankubuge PA(4), 
Rwebembera J(4), Wing K(1)(2), Sesay AA(2), Kanter AS(3)(7), Ramos GD(4), Walton 
D(4)(5), Cummings R(2)(8), Checchi F(1)(2)(8), Fraser HS(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Save the Children International, Kerry Town, Sierra Leone.
(3)OpenMRS Inc, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(4)ThoughtWorks, Kampala, Uganda.
(5)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(6)Partners In Health, Boston, MA, United States.
(7)Columbia University, New York City, NY, United States.
(8)Save the Children UK, London, United Kingdom.
(9)University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Stringent infection control requirements at Ebola treatment centers 
(ETCs), which are specialized facilities for isolating and treating Ebola 
patients, create substantial challenges for recording and reviewing patient 
information. During the 2014-2016 West African Ebola epidemic, paper-based data 
collection systems at ETCs compromised the quality, quantity, and 
confidentiality of patient data. Electronic health record (EHR) systems have the 
potential to address such problems, with benefits for patient care, 
surveillance, and research. However, no suitable software was available for 
deployment when large-scale ETCs opened as the epidemic escalated in 2014.
OBJECTIVE: We present our work on rapidly developing and deploying 
OpenMRS-Ebola, an EHR system for the Kerry Town ETC in Sierra Leone. We describe 
our experience, lessons learned, and recommendations for future health 
emergencies.
METHODS: We used the OpenMRS platform and Agile software development approaches 
to build OpenMRS-Ebola. Key features of our work included daily communications 
between the development team and ground-based operations team, iterative 
processes, and phased development and implementation. We made design decisions 
based on the restrictions of the ETC environment and regular user feedback. To 
evaluate the system, we conducted predeployment user questionnaires and compared 
the EHR records with duplicate paper records.
RESULTS: We successfully built OpenMRS-Ebola, a modular stand-alone EHR system 
with a tablet-based application for infectious patient wards and a desktop-based 
application for noninfectious areas. OpenMRS-Ebola supports patient tracking 
(registration, bed allocation, and discharge); recording of vital signs and 
symptoms; medication and intravenous fluid ordering and monitoring; laboratory 
results; clinician notes; and data export. It displays relevant patient 
information to clinicians in infectious and noninfectious zones. We implemented 
phase 1 (patient tracking; drug ordering and monitoring) after 2.5 months of 
full-time development. OpenMRS-Ebola was used for 112 patient registrations, 569 
prescription orders, and 971 medication administration recordings. We were 
unable to fully implement phases 2 and 3 as the ETC closed because of a decrease 
in new Ebola cases. The phase 1 evaluation suggested that OpenMRS-Ebola worked 
well in the context of the rollout, and the user feedback was positive.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, OpenMRS-Ebola is the most comprehensive adaptable 
clinical EHR built for a low-resource setting health emergency. It is designed 
to address the main challenges of data collection in highly infectious 
environments that require robust infection prevention and control measures and 
it is interoperable with other electronic health systems. Although we built and 
deployed OpenMRS-Ebola more rapidly than typical software, our work highlights 
the challenges of having to develop an appropriate system during an emergency 
rather than being able to rapidly adapt an existing one. Lessons learned from 
this and previous emergencies should be used to ensure that a set of 
well-designed, easy-to-use, pretested health software is ready for quick 
deployment in future.

©Shefali Oza, Darius Jazayeri, Jonathan M Teich, Ellen Ball, Patricia Alexandra 
Nankubuge, Job Rwebembera, Kevin Wing, Alieu Amara Sesay, Andrew S Kanter, 
Glauber D Ramos, David Walton, Rachael Cummings, Francesco Checchi, Hamish S 
Fraser. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research 
(http://www.jmir.org), 21.08.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.7881
PMCID: PMC5583502
PMID: 28827211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: DJ, PN, JR, GR, and DW 
are (or were) employees of ThoughtWorks during the course of this project and 
manuscript preparation. None of the other authors declare any conflicts of 
interest.