306. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Apr 27;7:22. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0059-z. 
eCollection 2016.

Active learning for ontological event extraction incorporating named entity 
recognition and unknown word handling.

Han X(1), Kim JJ(2), Kwoh CK(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang 
Avenue, Singapore, 639798 Singapore.
(2)Data Analytics Department, Institute for Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis 
Way, Singapore, 138632 Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Biomedical text mining may target various kinds of valuable 
information embedded in the literature, but a critical obstacle to the extension 
of the mining targets is the cost of manual construction of labeled data, which 
are required for state-of-the-art supervised learning systems. Active learning 
is to choose the most informative documents for the supervised learning in order 
to reduce the amount of required manual annotations. Previous works of active 
learning, however, focused on the tasks of entity recognition and 
protein-protein interactions, but not on event extraction tasks for multiple 
event types. They also did not consider the evidence of event participants, 
which might be a clue for the presence of events in unlabeled documents. 
Moreover, the confidence scores of events produced by event extraction systems 
are not reliable for ranking documents in terms of informativity for supervised 
learning. We here propose a novel committee-based active learning method that 
supports multi-event extraction tasks and employs a new statistical method for 
informativity estimation instead of using the confidence scores from event 
extraction systems.
METHODS: Our method is based on a committee of two systems as follows: We first 
employ an event extraction system to filter potential false negatives among 
unlabeled documents, from which the system does not extract any event. We then 
develop a statistical method to rank the potential false negatives of unlabeled 
documents 1) by using a language model that measures the probabilities of the 
expression of multiple events in documents and 2) by using a named entity 
recognition system that locates the named entities that can be event arguments 
(e.g. proteins). The proposed method further deals with unknown words in test 
data by using word similarity measures. We also apply our active learning method 
for the task of named entity recognition.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We evaluate the proposed method against the BioNLP 
Shared Tasks datasets, and show that our method can achieve better performance 
than such previous methods as entropy and Gibbs error based methods and a 
conventional committee-based method. We also show that the incorporation of 
named entity recognition into the active learning for event extraction and the 
unknown word handling further improve the active learning method. In addition, 
the adaptation of the active learning method into named entity recognition tasks 
also improves the document selection for manual annotation of named entities.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0059-z
PMCID: PMC4849099
PMID: 27127603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]