603. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2016 Jul;130:198-204. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.01.022. Epub 2016 May 3.

Proposed model for a Romanian register of chronic diseases in children.

Gabor-Harosa FM(1), Stan OP(2), Daina L(3), Mocean F(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Iuliu Hatieganu", Community Medicine 
Department, Public Health Discipline, Avram Iancu no. 31, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. 
Electronic address: florinaharosa@gmail.com.
(2)Technical University, Faculty of Automation and Computer Science, Department 
of Automation, George Baritiu no. 26-28, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. Electronic 
address: stan.ovidiu@gmail.com.
(3)Oradea University, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, 1 Decembrie Square no. 
10, Oradea, Romania. Electronic address: lucidaina@gmail.com.
(4)University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Iuliu Hatieganu", Community Medicine 
Department, Public Health Discipline, Avram Iancu no. 31, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. 
Electronic address: florymocean@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The prevalence of chronic diseases at children is 
increasing due to the progress made in medicine, which radically changed the 
evolution and the prognostics. Disease registers became important tools to 
register and monitor the chronic patients in order to asses their needs and 
improve their care. Disease registers are also very important for adjusting to 
population needs the actions in the public health field. The main objective for 
this research is to develop a model for a chronic disease register of children 
in Romania, taking into account the current situation of chronic diseases' 
registration and reporting, the specific requirements for such medical database 
and the particularities of the information systems in the Romanian healthcare 
system.
METHODS: Our study was based on interviews with specialists and Health Ministry 
representatives, field observations, and analysis of published and unpublished 
data).
RESULTS: We developed a platform for a chronic diseases register of children 
based on open EHR specifications and architecture, which respects the 
requirements for data security and the particularities of Romania's healthcare 
system. The model created is functioning on two levels. The first one is local 
and corresponds to a medical unit, while the second one represents the 
connection and the communication method within the entire national medical 
system. In order to achieve the highest level of interoperability at the 
semantic level, we used, for the communication module of a National Disease 
Register system, only EN 13606 or HL7 v3 and / or HL7 v3 CDA.
CONCLUSIONS: This model is functional and can be applied initially at a clinical 
level for medical and administrative purposes. Its design allows a future 
development, integrated with the current informational systems and implemented 
at regional and national level. This will significantly improve the knowledge 
that may support good medical practice in this field, will enhance the coherence 
of data collection and, as a consequence, will impact positevely on the health 
of children diagnosed with chronic diseases.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.01.022
PMID: 27208534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]