563. Online J Public Health Inform. 2015 Dec 30;7(3):e227. doi: 
10.5210/ojphi.v7i3.6282. eCollection 2015.

Characterizing the Access of Clinical Decision Support Offered by Immunization 
Information System in Minnesota.

Rajamani S(1), Bieringer A(2), Muscoplat M(2).

Author information:
(1)Public Health Informatics Program, School of Public Health, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(2)Minnesota Immunization Information Connection (MIIC), Immunization Program, 
Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, Minnesota.

BACKGROUND: Healthy People 2020 aims to improve population health by increasing 
immunization rates to decrease vaccine-preventable infectious diseases. Amongst 
the many strategies, role of immunization information systems (IIS) are 
recognized by studies and taskforce reports. IIS are unique in their offering of 
clinical decision support for immunizations (CDSi) which are utilized by 
healthcare providers. Federal initiatives such as Meaningful Use (MU) and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) aim to improve immunization rates through use of 
technology and expanding access to immunization services respectively. MU, the 
Electronic Health Record (EHR) incentive program includes use of IIS CDSi 
functionality as part of Stage 3. It is essential to understand access and use 
patterns of IIS CDSi, so as to utilize it better to improve immunization 
services.
OBJECTIVES: To understand the utilization of clinical decision support for 
immunizations (CDSi) offered by immunization information system in Minnesota and 
to analyze the variability of its use across providers and EHR implementations.
METHODS: IIS in Minnesota (Minnesota Immunization Information Connection: MIIC) 
offers CDSi that is accessed through EHRs and branded as Alternate Access (AA). 
Data from MIIC and technical documents were reviewed to create details on 
organizations which implemented AA functionality. Data on EHR adoption in 
clinics and local health departments was obtained from Minnesota eHealth 
assessment reports. Data on access were tracked from January 2015 through 
mid-October 2015 through weekly specialized reports to track the queries by 
organization, volume and day of the week. Data were analyzed, findings were 
synthesized and reviewed with subject matter experts.
RESULTS: Currently 25 healthcare systems/organizations which represent 599 
individual provider sites have implemented the AA functionality. Analysis of 
their EHR platform pointed to two EHRs (Epic and PH-Doc) as dominant products in 
Minnesota for private and public providers respectively. Use of this function 
was even across study time period. The query volume correlated to size of the 
organization, with the exception of an outlier organization with huge query 
count. Query was able to successfully locate a single matching record for 59% of 
searches, could not find a record for 5% and 31% resulted in blank/error and the 
match rates varied across health systems.
CONCLUSION: High EHR adoption offers a great opportunity to promote use of IIS 
CDSi at point of care. Analysis did not track use at individual clinic level and 
how the queries were being generated. Additional research is needed to 
understand the provider level use of this CDSi and other organizational and 
technical factors which influence access to IIS. This is essential for IIS as 
they execute projects to improve population-level immunization rates, plan 
provider outreach and prioritize their system enhancements to meet federal 
requirements.

DOI: 10.5210/ojphi.v7i3.6282
PMCID: PMC4874725
PMID: 27252795