137. J Med Internet Res. 2020 Aug 14;22(8):e20773. doi: 10.2196/20773.

Natural Language Processing for Rapid Response to Emergent Diseases: Case Study 
of Calcium Channel Blockers and Hypertension in the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Neuraz A(1)(2)(3), Lerner I(1)(2), Digan W(2)(4), Paris N(5), Tsopra R(2)(4), 
Rogier A(2)(4), Baudoin D(2)(4), Cohen KB(6), Burgun A(1)(2)(4), Garcelon 
N(2)(7), Rance B(2)(4); AP-HP/Universities/INSERM COVID-19 Research 
Collaboration; AP-HP COVID CDR Initiative(8).

Collaborators: Ancel PY, Bauchet A, Beeker N, Benoit V, Bernaux M, Bellamine A, 
Bey R, Bourmaud A, Breant S, Burgun A, Carrat F, Caucheteux C, Champ J, Cormont 
S, Daniel C, Dubiel J, Duclos C, Esteve L, Frank M, Garcelon N, Gramfort A, 
Griffon N, Grisel O, Guilbaud M, Hassen-Khodja C, Hemery F, Hilka M, Jannot AS, 
Lambert J, Layese R, Leblanc J, Lebouter L, Lemaitre G, Leprovost D, Lerner I, 
Sallah KL, Maire A, Mamzer MF, Martel P, Mensch A, Moreau T, Neuraz A, Orlova N, 
Paris N, Rance B, Ravera H, Rozes A, Salamanca E, Sandrin A, Serre P, Tannier X, 
Treluyer JM, van Gysel D, Varoquaux G, Jen Vie J, Wack M, Wajsburt P, Wassermann 
D, Zapletal E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Necker-Enfant Malades Hospital, 
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(2)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM UMRS 1138 Team 22, Université de 
Paris, Paris, France.
(3)LIMSI, CNRS, Université Paris Saclay, Orsay, France.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Georges Pompidou European Hospital, 
Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(5)DSI WIND, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(6)School of Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, CO, United States.
(7)Institut Imagine, INSERM U1163, Université Paris Descartes, Université de 
Paris, Paris, France.
(8)Please see acknowledgements for list of collaborators, .

BACKGROUND: A novel disease poses special challenges for informatics solutions. 
Biomedical informatics relies for the most part on structured data, which 
require a preexisting data or knowledge model; however, novel diseases do not 
have preexisting knowledge models. In an emergent epidemic, language processing 
can enable rapid conversion of unstructured text to a novel knowledge model. 
However, although this idea has often been suggested, no opportunity has arisen 
to actually test it in real time. The current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) 
pandemic presents such an opportunity.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the added value of information 
from clinical text in response to emergent diseases using natural language 
processing (NLP).
METHODS: We explored the effects of long-term treatment by calcium channel 
blockers on the outcomes of COVID-19 infection in patients with high blood 
pressure during in-patient hospital stays using two sources of information: data 
available strictly from structured electronic health records (EHRs) and data 
available through structured EHRs and text mining.
RESULTS: In this multicenter study involving 39 hospitals, text mining increased 
the statistical power sufficiently to change a negative result for an adjusted 
hazard ratio to a positive one. Compared to the baseline structured data, the 
number of patients available for inclusion in the study increased by 2.95 times, 
the amount of available information on medications increased by 7.2 times, and 
the amount of additional phenotypic information increased by 11.9 times.
CONCLUSIONS: In our study, use of calcium channel blockers was associated with 
decreased in-hospital mortality in patients with COVID-19 infection. This 
finding was obtained by quickly adapting an NLP pipeline to the domain of the 
novel disease; the adapted pipeline still performed sufficiently to extract 
useful information. When that information was used to supplement existing 
structured data, the sample size could be increased sufficiently to see 
treatment effects that were not previously statistically detectable.

©Antoine Neuraz, Ivan Lerner, William Digan, Nicolas Paris, Rosy Tsopra, Alice 
Rogier, David Baudoin, Kevin Bretonnel Cohen, Anita Burgun, Nicolas Garcelon, 
Bastien Rance, AP-HP/Universities/INSERM COVID-19 Research Collaboration; AP-HP 
COVID CDR Initiative. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research (http://www.jmir.org), 14.08.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/20773
PMCID: PMC7431235
PMID: 32759101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.