504. Bioinformatics. 2004 Nov 22;20(17):3206-13. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth386. 
Epub 2004 Jul 1.

BioRAT: extracting biological information from full-length papers.

Corney DP(1), Buxton BF, Langdon WB, Jones DT.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Computer Science, University College 
London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK. d.corney@cs.ucl.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: Converting the vast quantity of free-format text found in journals 
into a concise, structured format makes the researcher's quest for information 
easier. Recently, several information extraction systems have been developed 
that attempt to simplify the retrieval and analysis of biological and medical 
data. Most of this work has used the abstract alone, owing to the convenience of 
access and the quality of data. Abstracts are generally available through 
central collections with easy direct access (e.g. PubMed). The full-text papers 
contain more information, but are distributed across many locations (e.g. 
publishers' web sites, journal web sites and local repositories), making access 
more difficult. In this paper, we present BioRAT, a new information extraction 
(IE) tool, specifically designed to perform biomedical IE, and which is able to 
locate and analyse both abstracts and full-length papers. BioRAT is a Biological 
Research Assistant for Text mining, and incorporates a document search ability 
with domain-specific IE.
RESULTS: We show first, that BioRAT performs as well as existing systems, when 
applied to abstracts; and second, that significantly more information is 
available to BioRAT through the full-length papers than via the abstracts alone. 
Typically, less than half of the available information is extracted from the 
abstract, with the majority coming from the body of each paper. Overall, BioRAT 
recalled 20.31% of the target facts from the abstracts with 55.07% precision, 
and achieved 43.6% recall with 51.25% precision on full-length papers.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth386
PMID: 15231534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]