389. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Apr 11;9 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S11. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-9-S3-S11.

Identification of transcription factor contexts in literature using machine 
learning approaches.

Yang H(1), Nenadic G, Keane JA.

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 
Hui.Yang@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Availability of information about transcription factors (TFs) is 
crucial for genome biology, as TFs play a central role in the regulation of gene 
expression. While manual literature curation is expensive and labour intensive, 
the development of semi-automated text mining support is hindered by 
unavailability of training data. There have been no studies on how existing data 
sources (e.g. TF-related data from the MeSH thesaurus and GO ontology) or 
potentially noisy example data (e.g. protein-protein interaction, PPI) could be 
used to provide training data for identification of TF-contexts in literature.
RESULTS: In this paper we describe a text-classification system designed to 
automatically recognise contexts related to transcription factors in literature. 
A learning model is based on a set of biological features (e.g. protein and gene 
names, interaction words, other biological terms) that are deemed relevant for 
the task. We have exploited background knowledge from existing biological 
resources (MeSH and GO) to engineer such features. Weak and noisy training 
datasets have been collected from descriptions of TF-related concepts in MeSH 
and GO, PPI data and data representing non-protein-function descriptions. Three 
machine-learning methods are investigated, along with a vote-based merging of 
individual approaches and/or different training datasets. The system achieved 
highly encouraging results, with most classifiers achieving an F-measure above 
90%.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental results have shown that the proposed model can be 
used for identification of TF-related contexts (i.e. sentences) with high 
accuracy, with a significantly reduced set of features when compared to 
traditional bag-of-words approach. The results of considering existing PPI data 
suggest that there is not as high similarity between TF and PPI contexts as we 
have expected. We have also shown that existing knowledge sources are useful 
both for feature engineering and for obtaining noisy positive training data.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S3-S11
PMCID: PMC2352869
PMID: 18426546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]