610. Trials. 2019 Dec 11;20(1):706. doi: 10.1186/s13063-019-3847-9.

Electronic health record nested pragmatic randomized controlled trial of a 
reminder system for serum lithium level monitoring in patients with mood 
disorder: KONOTORI study protocol.

Seki T(1), Aki M(2), Kawashima H(2)(3), Miki T(2)(3), Tanaka S(4), Kawakami 
K(1), Furukawa TA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacoepidemiology, Graduate School of Medicine/School of 
Public Health, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Toyooka Hospital, Toyooka, Hyogo, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Biostatistics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Health Promotion and Human Behavior, Graduate School of 
Medicine/School of Public Health, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. 
furukawa@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The weaknesses of classical explanatory randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) include limited generalizability, high cost, and time burden. Pragmatic 
RCTs nested within electronic health records (EHRs) can be useful to overcome 
such limitations. Serum lithium monitoring has often been underutilized in 
real-world practice in Japan. This trial aims to evaluate the effectiveness of 
the EHR-nested reminder system for serum lithium level monitoring in the 
maintenance of therapeutic lithium concentration and in the improvement of the 
quality of care for patients on lithium maintenance therapy.
METHODS: The Kyoto Toyooka nested controlled trial of reminders (KONOTORI trial) 
is an EHR-nested, parallel-group, superiority, stratified, permuted 
block-randomized controlled trial. Screening, random allocation, reminder 
output, and outcome collection will be conducted automatically by the EHR-nested 
trial program. Patients with a mood disorder taking lithium carbonate for 
maintenance therapy will be randomly allocated to the two-step reminder system 
for serum lithium monitoring or to usual care. The primary outcome is the 
achievement of therapeutic serum lithium concentration between 0.4 and 1.0 mEq/L 
at 18 months after informed consent.
DISCUSSION: The KONOTORI trial uses EHRs to enable the efficient conduct of a 
pragmatic trial of the reminder system for lithium monitoring. This may 
contribute to improved quality of care for patients on lithium maintenance 
therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: University Hospital Medical Information Network (UMIN) 
Clinical Trials Registry, UMIN000033633. Registered on 3 July 2018.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-019-3847-9
PMCID: PMC6907204
PMID: 31829279

Conflict of interest statement: TS received a stipend from Pfizer, Inc. ST has 
received lecture fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, Astra-Zeneca, Taiho 
Pharmaceutical, Ono Pharmaceutical, and JMDC Inc. He received consultation fees 
from the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency and DeNA Life Science and 
outsourcing fees from the Public Health Research Foundation. ST has received 
grants from the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, the Japanese 
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, and the Japanese Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. He engaged in a research project of the 
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development. KK received honoraria from 
Shin Nippon Biomedical Laboratories, Ltd.; research funds from Olympus 
Corporation, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd., Bayer Yakuhin Ltd., Stella. 
Pharma Corporation, Novartis Pharma K.K., CMIC Co., Ltd., Amgen Astellas 
BioPharma K.K., Suntory Beverage & Food Ltd., and Medical Platform Co., Ltd.; 
and holds stocks in School Health Record Center Co., Ltd. and Real World Data, 
Co., Ltd. There are no patent products under development or marketed products to 
declare that are relevant to those companies. TAF has received lecture fees from 
Janssen, Meiji, Mitsubishi-Tanabe, MSD, and Pfizer. TAF has received research 
support from Mitsubishi-Tanabe and Mochida. All other authors report that they 
have no relationships to disclose that are relevant to the contents of this 
paper.