181. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Nov 17;17(1):471. doi: 10.1186/s12859-016-1352-7.

Introducing Explorer of Taxon Concepts with a case study on spider measurement 
matrix building.

Cui H(1), Xu D(2), Chong SS(2), Ramirez M(3), Rodenhausen T(2), Macklin JA(4), 
Ludäscher B(5), Morris RA(6), Soto EM(7), Koch NM(7).

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. hongcui@email.arizona.edu.
(2)University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(3)Museo Argentino de Ciencias, Naturales, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa, Canada.
(5)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA.
(6)University of Massachusetts at Boston and Harvard University Herbaria, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Geology & Geophysics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Taxonomic descriptions are traditionally composed in natural 
language and published in a format that cannot be directly used by computers. 
The Exploring Taxon Concepts (ETC) project has been developing a set of 
web-based software tools that convert morphological descriptions published in 
telegraphic style to character data that can be reused and repurposed. This 
paper introduces the first semi-automated pipeline, to our knowledge, that 
converts morphological descriptions into taxon-character matrices to support 
systematics and evolutionary biology research. We then demonstrate and evaluate 
the use of the ETC Input Creation - Text Capture - Matrix Generation pipeline to 
generate body part measurement matrices from a set of 188 spider morphological 
descriptions and report the findings.
RESULTS: From the given set of spider taxonomic publications, two versions of 
input (original and normalized) were generated and used by the ETC Text Capture 
and ETC Matrix Generation tools. The tools produced two corresponding spider 
body part measurement matrices, and the matrix from the normalized input was 
found to be much more similar to a gold standard matrix hand-curated by the 
scientist co-authors. Special conventions utilized in the original descriptions 
(e.g., the omission of measurement units) were attributed to the lower 
performance of using the original input. The results show that simple 
normalization of the description text greatly increased the quality of the 
machine-generated matrix and reduced edit effort. The machine-generated matrix 
also helped identify issues in the gold standard matrix.
CONCLUSIONS: ETC Text Capture and ETC Matrix Generation are low-barrier and 
effective tools for extracting measurement values from spider taxonomic 
descriptions and are more effective when the descriptions are self-contained. 
Special conventions that make the description text less self-contained challenge 
automated extraction of data from biodiversity descriptions and hinder the 
automated reuse of the published knowledge. The tools will be updated to support 
new requirements revealed in this case study.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-016-1352-7
PMCID: PMC5114841
PMID: 27855645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]