243. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2013 May 9;13:57. doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-13-57.

Applying representational state transfer (REST) architecture to archetype-based 
electronic health record systems.

Sundvall E(1), Nyström M, Karlsson D, Eneling M, Chen R, Örman H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Linköping University, Linköping 581 85, 
Sweden. erik.sundvall@liu.se

BACKGROUND: The openEHR project and the closely related ISO 13606 standard have 
defined structures supporting the content of Electronic Health Records (EHRs). 
However, there is not yet any finalized openEHR specification of a service 
interface to aid application developers in creating, accessing, and storing the 
EHR content.The aim of this paper is to explore how the Representational State 
Transfer (REST) architectural style can be used as a basis for a 
platform-independent, HTTP-based openEHR service interface. Associated benefits 
and tradeoffs of such a design are also explored.
RESULTS: The main contribution is the formalization of the openEHR storage, 
retrieval, and version-handling semantics and related services into an 
implementable HTTP-based service interface. The modular design makes it possible 
to prototype, test, replicate, distribute, cache, and load-balance the system 
using ordinary web technology. Other contributions are approaches to query and 
retrieval of the EHR content that takes caching, logging, and distribution into 
account. Triggering on EHR change events is also explored.A final contribution 
is an open source openEHR implementation using the above-mentioned approaches to 
create LiU EEE, an educational EHR environment intended to help newcomers and 
developers experiment with and learn about the archetype-based EHR approach and 
enable rapid prototyping.
CONCLUSIONS: Using REST addressed many architectural concerns in a successful 
way, but an additional messaging component was needed to address some 
architectural aspects. Many of our approaches are likely of value to other 
archetype-based EHR implementations and may contribute to associated service 
model specifications.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-13-57
PMCID: PMC3694512
PMID: 23656624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]