401. Res Synth Methods. 2013 Sep;4(3):230-41. doi: 10.1002/jrsm.1082. Epub 2013 Jul 
3.

'Clustering' documents automatically to support scoping reviews of research: a 
case study.

Stansfield C(1), Thomas J(2), Kavanagh J(2).

Author information:
(1)Evidence for Policy and Practice Information and Coordinating Centre 
(EPPI-Centre), Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University 
of London, 18 Woburn Square London, London, WC1H 0NR, UK. c.stansfield@ioe.ac.uk
(2)Evidence for Policy and Practice Information and Coordinating Centre 
(EPPI-Centre), Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University 
of London, 18 Woburn Square London, London, WC1H 0NR, UK.

BACKGROUND: Scoping reviews of research help determine the feasibility and the 
resource requirements of conducting a systematic review, and the potential to 
generate a description of the literature quickly is attractive.
AIMS: To test the utility and applicability of an automated clustering tool to 
describe and group research studies to improve the efficiency of scoping 
reviews.
METHODS: A retrospective study of two completed scoping reviews was conducted. 
This compared the groups and descriptive categories obtained by automatically 
clustering titles and abstracts with those that had originally been derived 
using traditional researcher-driven techniques.
RESULTS: The clustering tool rapidly categorised research into themes, which 
were useful in some instances, but not in others. This provided a dynamic means 
to view each dataset. Interpretation was challenging where there were 
potentially multiple meanings of terms. Where relevant clusters were 
unambiguous, there was a high precision of relevant studies, although recall 
varied widely.
CONCLUSIONS: Policy-relevant scoping reviews are often undertaken rapidly, and 
this could potentially be enhanced by automation depending on the nature of the 
dataset and information sought. However, it is not a replacement for 
researcher-developed classification. The possibilities of further applications 
and potential for use in other types of review are discussed.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jrsm.1082
PMID: 26053843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]