33. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 13;11(4):e0152725. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152725. 
eCollection 2016.

DiMeX: A Text Mining System for Mutation-Disease Association Extraction.

Mahmood AS(1), Wu TJ(2), Mazumder R(2)(3), Vijay-Shanker K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, Delaware, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington 
University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America.
(3)McCormick Genomic and Proteomic Center, George Washington University, 
Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America.

The number of published articles describing associations between mutations and 
diseases is increasing at a fast pace. There is a pressing need to gather such 
mutation-disease associations into public knowledge bases, but manual curation 
slows down the growth of such databases. We have addressed this problem by 
developing a text-mining system (DiMeX) to extract mutation to disease 
associations from publication abstracts. DiMeX consists of a series of natural 
language processing modules that preprocess input text and apply syntactic and 
semantic patterns to extract mutation-disease associations. DiMeX achieves high 
precision and recall with F-scores of 0.88, 0.91 and 0.89 when evaluated on 
three different datasets for mutation-disease associations. DiMeX includes a 
separate component that extracts mutation mentions in text and associates them 
with genes. This component has been also evaluated on different datasets and 
shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance. The results indicate that our 
system outperforms the existing mutation-disease association tools, addressing 
the low precision problems suffered by most approaches. DiMeX was applied on a 
large set of abstracts from Medline to extract mutation-disease associations, as 
well as other relevant information including patient/cohort size and population 
data. The results are stored in a database that can be queried and downloaded at 
http://biotm.cis.udel.edu/dimex/. We conclude that this high-throughput 
text-mining approach has the potential to significantly assist researchers and 
curators to enrich mutation databases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152725
PMCID: PMC4830514
PMID: 27073839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.