522. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 19;14(2):e0212463. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212463. 
eCollection 2019.

Data model harmonization for the All Of Us Research Program: Transforming i2b2 
data into the OMOP common data model.

Klann JG(1)(2)(3), Joss MAH(1), Embree K(4), Murphy SN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Information Science and Computing, Partners Healthcare, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Computer Science, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Personalized Medicine, Partners Healthcare, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.

BACKGROUND: The All Of Us Research Program (AOU) is building a nationwide cohort 
of one million patients' EHR and genomic data. Data interoperability is 
paramount to the program's success. AOU is standardizing its EHR data around the 
Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) data model. OMOP is one of 
several standard data models presently used in national-scale initiatives. Each 
model is unique enough to make interoperability difficult. The i2b2 data 
warehousing and analytics platform is used at over 200 sites worldwide, which 
uses a flexible ontology-driven approach for data storage. We previously 
demonstrated this ontology system can drive data reconfiguration, to transform 
data into new formats without site-specific programming. We previously 
implemented this on our 12-site Accessible Research Commons for Health (ARCH) 
network to transform i2b2 into the Patient Centered Outcomes Research Network 
model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we leverage our investment in i2b2 high-performance 
transformations to support the AOU OMOP data pipeline. Because the ARCH ontology 
has gained widespread national interest (through the Accrual to Clinical Trials 
network, other PCORnet networks, and the Nebraska Lexicon), we leveraged sites' 
existing investments into this standard ontology. We developed an i2b2-to-OMOP 
transformation, driven by the ARCH-OMOP ontology and the OMOP concept mapping 
dictionary. We demonstrated and validated our approach in the AOU New England 
HPO (NEHPO). First, we transformed into OMOP a fake patient dataset in i2b2 and 
verified through AOU tools that the data was structurally compliant with OMOP. 
We then transformed a subset of data in the Partners Healthcare data warehouse 
into OMOP. We developed a checklist of assessments to ensure the transformed 
data had self-integrity (e.g., the distributions have an expected shape and 
required fields are populated), using OMOP's visual Achilles data quality tool. 
This i2b2-to-OMOP transformation is being used to send NEHPO production data to 
AOU. It is open-source and ready for use by other research projects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212463
PMCID: PMC6380544
PMID: 30779778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.