12. J Telemed Telecare. 2015 Sep;21(6):323-30. doi: 10.1177/1357633X15582108. Epub 
2015 May 20.

Electronic consultations (e-consults) to improve access to specialty care: a 
systematic review and narrative synthesis.

Vimalananda VG(1), Gupte G(2), Seraj SM(2), Orlander J(3), Berlowitz D(4), 
Fincke BG(5), Simon SR(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research (CHOIR), US 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA Section of 
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA varsha.vimalananda@va.gov.
(2)Department of Health Policy and Management, Boston University School of 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Section of General 
Internal Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(4)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research (CHOIR), US 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA Department of Health 
Policy and Management, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research (CHOIR), US 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research (CHOIR), US 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA VA Boston Healthcare 
System, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of General Internal Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston Massachusetts, USA Harvard Medical School, 
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: We define electronic consultations ("e-consults") as asynchronous, 
consultative, provider-to-provider communications within a shared electronic 
health record (EHR) or web-based platform. E-consults are intended to improve 
access to specialty expertise for patients and providers without the need for a 
face-to-face visit. Our goal was to systematically review and summarize the 
literature describing the use and effects of e-consults.
METHODS: We searched PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and CINAHL for 
studies related to e-consults published between 1990 through December 2014. 
Three reviewers identified empirical studies and system descriptions, including 
articles on systems that used a shared EHR or web-based platform, connected 
providers in the same health system, were used for two-way provider 
communication, and were text-based.
RESULTS: Our final review included 27 articles. Twenty-two were research studies 
and five were system descriptions. Eighteen originated from one of three sites 
with well-developed e-consult programs. Most studies reported on workflow 
impact, timeliness of specialty input, and/or provider perceptions of 
e-consults. E-consultations are used in a variety of ways within and across 
medical centers. They provide timely access to specialty care and are 
well-received by primary care providers.
DISCUSSION: E-consults are feasible in a variety of settings, flexible in their 
application, and facilitate timely specialty advice. More extensive and rigorous 
studies are needed to inform the e-consult process and describe its effect on 
access to specialty visits, cost and clinical outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1357633X15582108
PMCID: PMC4561452
PMID: 25995331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]