565. Bioinformatics. 2020 Feb 15;36(4):1226-1233. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz678.

Applying citizen science to gene, drug and disease relationship extraction from 
biomedical abstracts.

Tsueng G(1), Nanis M(1), Fouquier JT(1), Mayers M(1), Good BM(1), Su AI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

MOTIVATION: Biomedical literature is growing at a rate that outpaces our ability 
to harness the knowledge contained therein. To mine valuable inferences from the 
large volume of literature, many researchers use information extraction 
algorithms to harvest information in biomedical texts. Information extraction is 
usually accomplished via a combination of manual expert curation and 
computational methods. Advances in computational methods usually depend on the 
time-consuming generation of gold standards by a limited number of expert 
curators. Citizen science is public participation in scientific research. We 
previously found that citizen scientists are willing and capable of performing 
named entity recognition of disease mentions in biomedical abstracts, but did 
not know if this was true with relationship extraction (RE).
RESULTS: In this article, we introduce the Relationship Extraction Module of the 
web-based application Mark2Cure (M2C) and demonstrate that citizen scientists 
can perform RE. We confirm the importance of accurate named entity recognition 
on user performance of RE and identify design issues that impacted data quality. 
We find that the data generated by citizen scientists can be used to identify 
relationship types not currently available in the M2C Relationship Extraction 
Module. We compare the citizen science-generated data with algorithm-mined data 
and identify ways in which the two approaches may complement one another. We 
also discuss opportunities for future improvement of this system, as well as the 
potential synergies between citizen science, manual biocuration and natural 
language processing.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Mark2Cure platform: https://mark2cure.org; 
Mark2Cure source code: https://github.com/sulab/mark2cure; and data and analysis 
code for this article: https://github.com/gtsueng/M2C_rel_nb.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz678
PMID: 31504205