604. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 May 9;8 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S4. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-8-S3-S4.

AlzPharm: integration of neurodegeneration data using RDF.

Lam HY(1), Marenco L, Clark T, Gao Y, Kinoshita J, Shepherd G, Miller P, Wu E, 
Wong GT, Liu N, Crasto C, Morse T, Stephens S, Cheung KH.

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale 
University, New Haven, CT, USA. Hugo.YK.Lam@yale.edu <Hugo.YK.Lam@yale.edu>

BACKGROUND: Neuroscientists often need to access a wide range of data sets 
distributed over the Internet. These data sets, however, are typically neither 
integrated nor interoperable, resulting in a barrier to answering complex 
neuroscience research questions. Domain ontologies can enable the querying 
heterogeneous data sets, but they are not sufficient for neuroscience since the 
data of interest commonly span multiple research domains. To this end, 
e-Neuroscience seeks to provide an integrated platform for neuroscientists to 
discover new knowledge through seamless integration of the very diverse types of 
neuroscience data. Here we present a Semantic Web approach to building this 
e-Neuroscience framework by using the Resource Description Framework (RDF) and 
its vocabulary description language, RDF Schema (RDFS), as a standard data model 
to facilitate both representation and integration of the data.
RESULTS: We have constructed a pilot ontology for BrainPharm (a subset of 
SenseLab) using RDFS and then converted a subset of the BrainPharm data into RDF 
according to the ontological structure. We have also integrated the converted 
BrainPharm data with existing RDF hypothesis and publication data from a pilot 
version of SWAN (Semantic Web Applications in Neuromedicine). Our implementation 
uses the RDF Data Model in Oracle Database 10g release 2 for data integration, 
query, and inference, while our Web interface allows users to query the data and 
retrieve the results in a convenient fashion.
CONCLUSION: Accessing and integrating biomedical data which cuts across multiple 
disciplines will be increasingly indispensable and beneficial to neuroscience 
researchers. The Semantic Web approach we undertook has demonstrated a promising 
way to semantically integrate data sets created independently. It also shows how 
advanced queries and inferences can be performed over the integrated data, which 
are hard to achieve using traditional data integration approaches. Our pilot 
results suggest that our Semantic Web approach is suitable for realizing 
e-Neuroscience and generic enough to be applied in other biomedical fields.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-S3-S4
PMCID: PMC1892101
PMID: 17493287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]