410. Biodivers Data J. 2014 Jun 16;(2):e1125. doi: 10.3897/BDJ.2.e1125. eCollection 
2014.

Enriched biodiversity data as a resource and service.

Vos RA(1), Biserkov JV(2), Balech B(3), Beard N(4), Blissett M(5), 
Brenninkmeijer C(4), van Dooren T(1), Eades D(6), Gosline G(5), Groom QJ(7), 
Hamann TD(1), Hettling H(1), Hoehndorf R(8), Holleman A(1), Hovenkamp P(1), 
Kelbert P(9), King D(10), Kirkup D(5), Lammers Y(1), DeMeulemeester T(1), 
Mietchen D(11), Miller JA(1), Mounce R(12), Nicolson N(5), Page R(13), Pawlik 
A(14), Pereira S(1), Penev L(2), Richards K(15), Sautter G(16), Shorthouse 
DP(17), Tähtinen M(18), Weiland C(19), Williams AR(4), Sierra S(1).

Author information:
(1)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(2)Pensoft Publishers, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Institute of Biomembranes and Bioenergetics, National Research Council, Bari, 
Italy.
(4)University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, United Kingdom.
(6)The Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, United States of America.
(7)Agentschap Plantentuin Meise, Meise, Belgium.
(8)Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, United Kingdom.
(9)Botanic Garden and Botanical Museum Berlin-Dahlem, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(10)The Open University, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom.
(11)Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Germany.
(12)University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(13)University Of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(14)Software Sustainability Institute, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(15)Biodiversity Informatics Consultant, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(16)Plazi, Bern, Switzerland.
(17)Université de Montréal Biodiversity Centre, Montréal, Canada.
(18)University of Eastern Finland, Espoo, Finland.
(19)Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre, Senckenberg Gesellschaft für 
Naturforschung, Frankfurt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recent years have seen a surge in projects that produce large 
volumes of structured, machine-readable biodiversity data. To make these data 
amenable to processing by generic, open source "data enrichment" workflows, they 
are increasingly being represented in a variety of standards-compliant 
interchange formats. Here, we report on an initiative in which software 
developers and taxonomists came together to address the challenges and highlight 
the opportunities in the enrichment of such biodiversity data by engaging in 
intensive, collaborative software development: The Biodiversity Data Enrichment 
Hackathon.
RESULTS: The hackathon brought together 37 participants (including developers 
and taxonomists, i.e. scientific professionals that gather, identify, name and 
classify species) from 10 countries: Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Finland, 
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the UK, and the US. The 
participants brought expertise in processing structured data, text mining, 
development of ontologies, digital identification keys, geographic information 
systems, niche modeling, natural language processing, provenance annotation, 
semantic integration, taxonomic name resolution, web service interfaces, 
workflow tools and visualisation. Most use cases and exemplar data were provided 
by taxonomists. One goal of the meeting was to facilitate re-use and enhancement 
of biodiversity knowledge by a broad range of stakeholders, such as taxonomists, 
systematists, ecologists, niche modelers, informaticians and ontologists. The 
suggested use cases resulted in nine breakout groups addressing three main 
themes: i) mobilising heritage biodiversity knowledge; ii) formalising and 
linking concepts; and iii) addressing interoperability between service 
platforms. Another goal was to further foster a community of experts in 
biodiversity informatics and to build human links between research projects and 
institutions, in response to recent calls to further such integration in this 
research domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Beyond deriving prototype solutions for each use case, areas of 
inadequacy were discussed and are being pursued further. It was striking how 
many possible applications for biodiversity data there were and how quickly 
solutions could be put together when the normal constraints to collaboration 
were broken down for a week. Conversely, mobilising biodiversity knowledge from 
their silos in heritage literature and natural history collections will continue 
to require formalisation of the concepts (and the links between them) that 
define the research domain, as well as increased interoperability between the 
software platforms that operate on these concepts.

DOI: 10.3897/BDJ.2.e1125
PMCID: PMC4092319
PMID: 25057255