607. Acad Emerg Med. 2019 Jan;26(1):97-105. doi: 10.1111/acem.13520. Epub 2018 Aug 
16.

Priorities to Overcome Barriers Impacting Data Science Application in Emergency 
Care Research.

Puskarich MA(1), Callaway C(2), Silbergleit R(3), Pines JM(4), Obermeyer Z(5), 
Wright DW(6), Hsia RY(7), Shah MN(8), Monte AA(9), Limkakeng AT Jr(10), Meisel 
ZF(11), Levy PD(12).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS.
(2)The Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA.
(3)The Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(4)The Departments of Emergency Medicine and Health Policy & Management, George 
Washington University, Washington, DC.
(5)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(6)The Departments of Emergency Medicine and Health Policy & Management, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA.
(7)The Department of Emergency Medicine, The Institute of Health Policy Studies, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(8)The Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI.
(9)The Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO.
(10)The Division of Emergency Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham, NC.
(11)The Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA.
(12)The Department of Emergency Medicine and Integrative Biosciences Center, 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.

For a variety of reasons including cheap computing, widespread adoption of 
electronic medical records, digitalization of imaging and biosignals, and rapid 
development of novel technologies, the amount of health care data being 
collected, recorded, and stored is increasing at an exponential rate. Yet 
despite these advances, methods for the valid, efficient, and ethical 
utilization of these data remain underdeveloped. Emergency care research, in 
particular, poses several unique challenges in this rapidly evolving field. A 
group of content experts was recently convened to identify research priorities 
related to barriers to the application of data science to emergency care 
research. These recommendations included: 1) developing methods for 
cross-platform identification and linkage of patients; 2) creating central, 
deidentified, open-access databases; 3) improving methodologies for 
visualization and analysis of intensively sampled data; 4) developing methods to 
identify and standardize electronic medical record data quality; 5) improving 
and utilizing natural language processing; 6) developing and utilizing syndrome 
or complaint-based based taxonomies of disease; 7) developing practical and 
ethical framework to leverage electronic systems for controlled trials; 8) 
exploring technologies to help enable clinical trials in the emergency setting; 
and 9) training emergency care clinicians in data science and data scientists in 
emergency care medicine. The background, rationale, and conclusions of these 
recommendations are included in the present article.

© 2018 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/acem.13520
PMCID: PMC6637965
PMID: 30019795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial 
information or potential conflicts to disclose.