475. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jan 1;27(1):22-30. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocz075.

An ensemble of neural models for nested adverse drug events and medication 
extraction with subwords.

Ju M(1)(2), Nguyen NTH(1)(2), Miwa M(3)(2), Ananiadou S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, School of Computer Science, The University 
of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Artificial Intelligence Research Centre (AIRC), National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Toyota Technological Institute, Nagoya, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: This article describes an ensembling system to automatically extract 
adverse drug events and drug related entities from clinical narratives, which 
was developed for the 2018 n2c2 Shared Task Track 2.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We designed a neural model to tackle both nested 
(entities embedded in other entities) and polysemous entities (entities 
annotated with multiple semantic types) based on MIMIC III discharge summaries. 
To better represent rare and unknown words in entities, we further tokenized the 
MIMIC III data set by splitting the words into finer-grained subwords. We 
finally combined all the models to boost the performance. Additionally, we 
implemented a featured-based conditional random field model and created an 
ensemble to combine its predictions with those of the neural model.
RESULTS: Our method achieved 92.78% lenient micro F1-score, with 95.99% lenient 
precision, and 89.79% lenient recall, respectively. Experimental results showed 
that combining the predictions of either multiple models, or of a single model 
with different settings can improve performance.
DISCUSSION: Analysis of the development set showed that our neural models can 
detect more informative text regions than feature-based conditional random field 
models. Furthermore, most entity types significantly benefit from subword 
representation, which also allows us to extract sparse entities, especially 
nested entities.
CONCLUSION: The overall results have demonstrated that the ensemble method can 
accurately recognize entities, including nested and polysemous entities. 
Additionally, our method can recognize sparse entities by reconsidering the 
clinical narratives at a finer-grained subword level, rather than at the word 
level.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocz075
PMCID: PMC6913208
PMID: 31197355