264. Methods Inf Med. 2006;45(4):359-66.

Standardized exchange of clinical documents--towards a shared care paradigm in 
glaucoma treatment.

Gerdsen F(1), Müller S, Jablonski S, Prokosch HU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. 
frederic.gerdsen@mik.imed.uni-erlangen.de

OBJECTIVES: The exchange of medical data from research and clinical routine 
across institutional borders is essential to establish an integrated healthcare 
platform. In this project we want to realize the standardized exchange of 
medical data between different healthcare institutions to implement an 
integrated and interoperable information system supporting clinical treatment 
and research of glaucoma.
METHODS: The central point of our concept is a standardized communication model 
based on the Clinical Document Architecture (CDA). Further, a communication 
concept between different health care institutions applying the developed 
document model has been defined.
RESULTS: With our project we have been able to prove that standardized 
communication between an Electronic Medical Record (EMR), an Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) and the Erlanger Glaucoma Register (EGR) based on the established 
conceptual models, which rely on CDA rel.1 level 1 and SCIPHOX, could be 
implemented. The HL7-tool-based deduction of a suitable CDA rel.2 compliant 
schema showed significant differences when compared with the manually created 
schema. Finally fundamental requirements, which have to be implemented for an 
integrated health care platform, have been identified.
CONCLUSIONS: An interoperable information system can enhance both clinical 
treatment and research projects. By automatically transferring screening 
findings from a glaucoma research project to the electronic medical record of 
our ophthalmology clinic, clinicians could benefit from the availability of a 
longitudinal patient record. The CDA as a standard for exchanging clinical 
documents has demonstrated its potential to enhance interoperability within a 
future shared care paradigm.

PMID: 16964350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]