278. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2017 Sep 1;24(5):913-920. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocx022.

Development of an automated assessment tool for MedWatch reports in the FDA 
adverse event reporting system.

Han L(1), Ball R(2), Pamer CA(2), Altman RB(3)(4), Proestel S(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Training Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(2)Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University.

OBJECTIVE: As the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) receives over a million 
adverse event reports associated with medication use every year, a system is 
needed to aid FDA safety evaluators in identifying reports most likely to 
demonstrate causal relationships to the suspect medications. We combined text 
mining with machine learning to construct and evaluate such a system to identify 
medication-related adverse event reports.
METHODS: FDA safety evaluators assessed 326 reports for medication-related 
causality. We engineered features from these reports and constructed random 
forest, L1 regularized logistic regression, and support vector machine models. 
We evaluated model accuracy and further assessed utility by generating report 
rankings that represented a prioritized report review process.
RESULTS: Our random forest model showed the best performance in report ranking 
and accuracy, with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 
0.66. The generated report ordering assigns reports with a higher probability of 
medication-related causality a higher rank and is significantly correlated to a 
perfect report ordering, with a Kendall's tau of 0.24 ( P  = .002).
CONCLUSION: Our models produced prioritized report orderings that enable FDA 
safety evaluators to focus on reports that are more likely to contain valuable 
medication-related adverse event information. Applying our models to all FDA 
adverse event reports has the potential to streamline the manual review process 
and greatly reduce reviewer workload.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical 
Informatics Association 2017. This work is written by US Government employees 
and is in the public domain in the United States.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocx022
PMID: 28371826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]