303. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Nov 19;9 Suppl 11(Suppl 11):S3. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-9-S11-S3.

Mining clinical relationships from patient narratives.

Roberts A(1), Gaizauskas R, Hepple M, Guo Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, Regent Court, 211 
Portobello, Sheffield S14DP, UK. a.roberts@dcs.shef.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The Clinical E-Science Framework (CLEF) project has built a system 
to extract clinically significant information from the textual component of 
medical records in order to support clinical research, evidence-based healthcare 
and genotype-meets-phenotype informatics. One part of this system is the 
identification of relationships between clinically important entities in the 
text. Typical approaches to relationship extraction in this domain have used 
full parses, domain-specific grammars, and large knowledge bases encoding domain 
knowledge. In other areas of biomedical NLP, statistical machine learning (ML) 
approaches are now routinely applied to relationship extraction. We report on 
the novel application of these statistical techniques to the extraction of 
clinical relationships.
RESULTS: We have designed and implemented an ML-based system for relation 
extraction, using support vector machines, and trained and tested it on a corpus 
of oncology narratives hand-annotated with clinically important relationships. 
Over a class of seven relation types, the system achieves an average F1 score of 
72%, only slightly behind an indicative measure of human inter annotator 
agreement on the same task. We investigate the effectiveness of different 
features for this task, how extraction performance varies between inter- and 
intra-sentential relationships, and examine the amount of training data needed 
to learn various relationships.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that it is possible to extract important clinical 
relationships from text, using supervised statistical ML techniques, at levels 
of accuracy approaching those of human annotators. Given the importance of 
relation extraction as an enabling technology for text mining and given also the 
ready adaptability of systems based on our supervised learning approach to other 
clinical relationship extraction tasks, this result has significance for 
clinical text mining more generally, though further work to confirm our 
encouraging results should be carried out on a larger sample of narratives and 
relationship types.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S11-S3
PMCID: PMC2586752
PMID: 19025689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]