165. Database (Oxford). 2016 Aug 19;2016:baw120. doi: 10.1093/database/baw120. Print 
2016.

The Markyt visualisation, prediction and benchmark platform for chemical and 
gene entity recognition at BioCreative/CHEMDNER challenge.

Pérez-Pérez M(1), Pérez-Rodríguez G(1), Rabal O(2), Vazquez M(3), Oyarzabal 
J(2), Fdez-Riverola F(1), Valencia A(3), Krallinger M(3), Lourenço A(4).

Author information:
(1)ESEI - Department of Computer Science, University of Vigo, Ourense, Spain.
(2)Small Molecule Discovery Platform, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Center for 
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(3)Structural Computational Biology Group, Structural Biology and BioComputing 
Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain.
(4)ESEI - Department of Computer Science, University of Vigo, Ourense, Spain 
Small Molecule Discovery Platform, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Center for 
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain 
analia@uvigo.es.

Biomedical text mining methods and technologies have improved significantly in 
the last decade. Considerable efforts have been invested in understanding the 
main challenges of biomedical literature retrieval and extraction and proposing 
solutions to problems of practical interest. Most notably, community-oriented 
initiatives such as the BioCreative challenge have enabled controlled 
environments for the comparison of automatic systems while pursuing practical 
biomedical tasks. Under this scenario, the present work describes the Markyt 
Web-based document curation platform, which has been implemented to support the 
visualisation, prediction and benchmark of chemical and gene mention annotations 
at BioCreative/CHEMDNER challenge. Creating this platform is an important step 
for the systematic and public evaluation of automatic prediction systems and the 
reusability of the knowledge compiled for the challenge. Markyt was not only 
critical to support the manual annotation and annotation revision process but 
also facilitated the comparative visualisation of automated results against the 
manually generated Gold Standard annotations and comparative assessment of 
generated results. We expect that future biomedical text mining challenges and 
the text mining community may benefit from the Markyt platform to better explore 
and interpret annotations and improve automatic system predictions.Database URL: 
http://www.markyt.org, https://github.com/sing-group/Markyt.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baw120
PMCID: PMC5001550
PMID: 27542845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]