507. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Feb 24;7:92. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-92.

Various criteria in the evaluation of biomedical named entity recognition.

Tsai RT(1), Wu SH, Chou WC, Lin YC, He D, Hsiang J, Sung TY, Hsu WL.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115, ROC, 
Taiwan. thtsai@iis.sinica.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Text mining in the biomedical domain is receiving increasing 
attention. A key component of this process is named entity recognition (NER). 
Generally speaking, two annotated corpora, GENIA and GENETAG, are most 
frequently used for training and testing biomedical named entity recognition 
(Bio-NER) systems. JNLPBA and BioCreAtIvE are two major Bio-NER tasks using 
these corpora. Both tasks take different approaches to corpus annotation and use 
different matching criteria to evaluate system performance. This paper details 
these differences and describes alternative criteria. We then examine the impact 
of different criteria and annotation schemes on system performance by retesting 
systems participated in the above two tasks.
RESULTS: To analyze the difference between JNLPBA's and BioCreAtIvE's 
evaluation, we conduct Experiment 1 to evaluate the top four JNLPBA systems 
using BioCreAtIvE's classification scheme. We then compare them with the top 
four BioCreAtIvE systems. Among them, three systems participated in both tasks, 
and each has an F-score lower on JNLPBA than on BioCreAtIvE. In Experiment 2, we 
apply hypothesis testing and correlation coefficient to find alternatives to 
BioCreAtIvE's evaluation scheme. It shows that right-match and left-match 
criteria have no significant difference with BioCreAtIvE. In Experiment 3, we 
propose a customized relaxed-match criterion that uses right match and merges 
JNLPBA's five NE classes into two, which achieves an F-score of 81.5%. In 
Experiment 4, we evaluate a range of five matching criteria from loose to strict 
on the top JNLPBA system and examine the percentage of false negatives. Our 
experiment gives the relative change in precision, recall and F-score as 
matching criteria are relaxed.
CONCLUSION: In many applications, biomedical NEs could have several acceptable 
tags, which might just differ in their left or right boundaries. However, most 
corpora annotate only one of them. In our experiment, we found that right match 
and left match can be appropriate alternatives to JNLPBA and BioCreAtIvE's 
matching criteria. In addition, our relaxed-match criterion demonstrates that 
users can define their own relaxed criteria that correspond more realistically 
to their application requirements.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-92
PMCID: PMC1402329
PMID: 16504116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]