42. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Nov 6;19(1):405. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2429-2.

SIFR annotator: ontology-based semantic annotation of French biomedical text and 
clinical notes.

Tchechmedjiev A(1)(2), Abdaoui A(3), Emonet V(3), Zevio S(3), Jonquet C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Informatics, Robotics and Microelectronics of Montpellier 
(LIRMM), University of Montpellier, CNRS, 161, rue Ada, 34095, Montpellier cedex 
5, France. andon.tchechmedjiev@lirmm.fr.
(2)LGI2P, IMT Mines Ales, Univ Montpellier, Alès, France. 
andon.tchechmedjiev@lirmm.fr.
(3)Laboratory of Informatics, Robotics and Microelectronics of Montpellier 
(LIRMM), University of Montpellier, CNRS, 161, rue Ada, 34095, Montpellier cedex 
5, France.
(4)Center for Biomedical Informatics Research (BMIR), Stanford University, 1265 
Welch Rd, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.

BACKGROUND: Despite a wide adoption of English in science, a significant amount 
of biomedical data are produced in other languages, such as French. Yet a 
majority of natural language processing or semantic tools as well as domain 
terminologies or ontologies are only available in English, and cannot be readily 
applied to other languages, due to fundamental linguistic differences. However, 
semantic resources are required to design semantic indexes and transform 
biomedical (text)data into knowledge for better information mining and 
retrieval.
RESULTS: We present the SIFR Annotator ( http://bioportal.lirmm.fr/annotator ), 
a publicly accessible ontology-based annotation web service to process 
biomedical text data in French. The service, developed during the Semantic 
Indexing of French Biomedical Data Resources (2013-2019) project is included in 
the SIFR BioPortal, an open platform to host French biomedical ontologies and 
terminologies based on the technology developed by the US National Center for 
Biomedical Ontology. The portal facilitates use and fostering of ontologies by 
offering a set of services -search, mappings, metadata, versioning, 
visualization, recommendation- including for annotation purposes. We introduce 
the adaptations and improvements made in applying the technology to French as 
well as a number of language independent additional features -implemented by 
means of a proxy architecture- in particular annotation scoring and clinical 
context detection. We evaluate the performance of the SIFR Annotator on 
different biomedical data, using available French corpora -Quaero (titles from 
French MEDLINE abstracts and EMEA drug labels) and CépiDC (ICD-10 coding of 
death certificates)- and discuss our results with respect to the CLEF eHealth 
information extraction tasks.
CONCLUSIONS: We show the web service performs comparably to other 
knowledge-based annotation approaches in recognizing entities in biomedical text 
and reach state-of-the-art levels in clinical context detection (negation, 
experiencer, temporality). Additionally, the SIFR Annotator is the first openly 
web accessible tool to annotate and contextualize French biomedical text with 
ontology concepts leveraging a dictionary currently made of 28 terminologies and 
ontologies and 333 K concepts. The code is openly available, and we also provide 
a Docker packaging for easy local deployment to process sensitive (e.g., 
clinical) data in-house ( https://github.com/sifrproject ).

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2429-2
PMCID: PMC6218966
PMID: 30400805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
CISMeF/SIBM (see related work section) were an early partner of the SIFR 
project. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.