384. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 23;10:349. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-349.

Construction of an annotated corpus to support biomedical information 
extraction.

Thompson P(1), Iqbal SA, McNaught J, Ananiadou S.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, 
University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK. 
paul.thompson@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Information Extraction (IE) is a component of text mining that 
facilitates knowledge discovery by automatically locating instances of 
interesting biomedical events from huge document collections. As events are 
usually centred on verbs and nominalised verbs, understanding the syntactic and 
semantic behaviour of these words is highly important. Corpora annotated with 
information concerning this behaviour can constitute a valuable resource in the 
training of IE components and resources.
RESULTS: We have defined a new scheme for annotating sentence-bound gene 
regulation events, centred on both verbs and nominalised verbs. For each event 
instance, all participants (arguments) in the same sentence are identified and 
assigned a semantic role from a rich set of 13 roles tailored to biomedical 
research articles, together with a biological concept type linked to the Gene 
Regulation Ontology. To our knowledge, our scheme is unique within the 
biomedical field in terms of the range of event arguments identified. Using the 
scheme, we have created the Gene Regulation Event Corpus (GREC), consisting of 
240 MEDLINE abstracts, in which events relating to gene regulation and 
expression have been annotated by biologists. A novel method of evaluating 
various different facets of the annotation task showed that average 
inter-annotator agreement rates fall within the range of 66% - 90%.
CONCLUSION: The GREC is a unique resource within the biomedical field, in that 
it annotates not only core relationships between entities, but also a range of 
other important details about these relationships, e.g., location, temporal, 
manner and environmental conditions. As such, it is specifically designed to 
support bio-specific tool and resource development. It has already been used to 
acquire semantic frames for inclusion within the BioLexicon (a lexical, 
terminological resource to aid biomedical text mining). Initial experiments have 
also shown that the corpus may viably be used to train IE components, such as 
semantic role labellers. The corpus and annotation guidelines are freely 
available for academic purposes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-349
PMCID: PMC2774701
PMID: 19852798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]