451. Drug Saf. 2020 Sep;43(9):905-915. doi: 10.1007/s40264-020-00945-0.

Information Visualization Platform for Postmarket Surveillance Decision Support.

Spiker J(1), Kreimeyer K(1), Dang O(2), Boxwell D(2), Chan V(2), Cheng C(2), 
Gish P(2), Lardieri A(2), Wu E(2), De S(2), Naidoo J(1), Lehmann H(3), Rosner 
GL(1), Ball R(2), Botsis T(4).

Author information:
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Office of Surveillance and Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, US FDA, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(3)Division of Health Sciences Informatics, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. tbotsis1@jhmi.edu.

INTRODUCTION: The US FDA receives more than 2 million postmarket reports each 
year. Safety Evaluators (SEs) review these reports, as well as external 
information, to identify potential safety signals. With the increasing number of 
reports and the size of external information, more efficient solutions for data 
integration and decision making are needed.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to develop an interactive decision support 
application for drug safety surveillance that integrates and visualizes 
information from postmarket reports, product labels, and biomedical literature.
METHODS: We conducted multiple meetings with a group of seven SEs at the FDA to 
collect the requirements for the Information Visualization Platform (InfoViP). 
Using infographic design principles, we implemented the InfoViP prototype 
version as a modern web application using the integrated information collected 
from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System, the DailyMed repository, and 
PubMed. The same group of SEs evaluated the InfoViP prototype functionalities 
using a simple evaluation form and provided input for potential enhancements.
RESULTS: The SEs described their workflows and overall expectations around the 
automation of time-consuming tasks, including the access to the visualization of 
external information. We developed a set of wireframes, shared them with the 
SEs, and finalized the InfoViP design. The InfoViP prototype architecture relied 
on a javascript and a python-based framework, as well as an existing tool for 
the processing of free-text information in all sources. This natural language 
processing tool supported multiple functionalities, especially the construction 
of time plots for individual postmarket reports and groups of reports. Overall, 
we received positive comments from the SEs during the InfoViP prototype 
evaluation and addressed their suggestions in the final version.
CONCLUSIONS: The InfoViP system uses context-driven interactive visualizations 
and informatics tools to assist FDA SEs in synthesizing data from multiple 
sources for their case series analyses.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-020-00945-0
PMID: 32445187