514. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Apr 29;11:551. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00551. eCollection 
2020.

Model-Informed Precision Dosing of Vancomycin in Hospitalized Children: 
Implementation and Adoption at an Academic Children's Hospital.

Frymoyer A(1), Schwenk HT(1), Zorn Y(2), Bio L(2), Moss JD(2), Chasmawala B(3), 
Faulkenberry J(3), Goswami S(4), Keizer RJ(4), Ghaskari S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA, United States.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford, 
Palo Alto, CA, United States.
(3)Information Services, Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford, Palo Alto, 
CA, United States.
(4)InsightRx, San Francisco, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Model-informed precision dosing (MIPD) can serve as a powerful tool 
during therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) to help individualize dosing in 
populations with large pharmacokinetic variation. Yet, adoption of MIPD in the 
clinical setting has been limited. Overcoming technologic hurdles that allow 
access to MIPD at the point-of-care and placing it in the hands of clinical 
specialists focused on medication dosing may encourage adoption.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the hospital implementation and usage of a MIPD clinical 
decision support (CDS) tool for vancomycin in a pediatric population.
METHODS: Within an academic children's hospital, MIPD for vancomycin was 
implemented via a commercial cloud-based CDS tool that utilized Bayesian 
forecasting. Clinical pharmacists were recognized as local champions to 
facilitate adoption of the tool and operated as end-users. Integration within 
the electronic health record (EHR) and automatic transmission of patient data to 
the tool were identified as important requirements. A web-link icon was 
developed within the EHR which when clicked sends users and needed patient-level 
clinical data to the CDS platform. Individualized pharmacokinetic predictions 
and exposure metrics for vancomycin are then presented in the form of a 
web-based dashboard. Use of the CDS tool as part of TDM was tracked and users 
were surveyed on their experience.
RESULTS: After a successful pilot phase in the neonatal intensive care unit, 
implementation of MIPD was expanded to the pediatric intensive care unit, 
followed by availability to the entire hospital. During the first 2+ years since 
implementation, a total of 853 patient-courses (n = 96 neonates, n = 757 
children) and 2,148 TDM levels were evaluated using the CDS tool. For the most 
recent 6 months, the CDS tool was utilized to support 79% (181/230) of 
patient-courses in which TDM was performed. Of 26 users surveyed, > 96% agreed 
or strongly agreed that automatic transmission of patient data to the tool was a 
feature that helped them complete tasks more efficiently; 81% agreed or strongly 
agreed that they were satisfied with the CDS tool.
CONCLUSIONS: Integration of a vancomycin CDS tool within the EHR, along with 
leveraging the expertise of clinical pharmacists, allowed for successful 
adoption of MIPD in clinical care.

Copyright © 2020 Frymoyer, Schwenk, Zorn, Bio, Moss, Chasmawala, Faulkenberry, 
Goswami, Keizer and Ghaskari.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00551
PMCID: PMC7201037
PMID: 32411000