314. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(2):e1002854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002854. Epub 
2013 Feb 7.

Getting more out of biomedical documents with GATE's full lifecycle open source 
text analytics.

Cunningham H(1), Tablan V, Roberts A, Bontcheva K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. 
hamish@gate.ac.uk

This software article describes the GATE family of open source text analysis 
tools and processes. GATE is one of the most widely used systems of its type 
with yearly download rates of tens of thousands and many active users in both 
academic and industrial contexts. In this paper we report three examples of 
GATE-based systems operating in the life sciences and in medicine. First, in 
genome-wide association studies which have contributed to discovery of a head 
and neck cancer mutation association. Second, medical records analysis which has 
significantly increased the statistical power of treatment/outcome models in the 
UK's largest psychiatric patient cohort. Third, richer constructs in 
drug-related searching. We also explore the ways in which the GATE family 
supports the various stages of the lifecycle present in our examples. We 
conclude that the deployment of text mining for document abstraction or rich 
search and navigation is best thought of as a process, and that with the right 
computational tools and data collection strategies this process can be made 
defined and repeatable. The GATE research programme is now 20 years old and has 
grown from its roots as a specialist development tool for text processing to 
become a rather comprehensive ecosystem, bringing together software developers, 
language engineers and research staff from diverse fields. GATE now has a strong 
claim to cover a uniquely wide range of the lifecycle of text analysis systems. 
It forms a focal point for the integration and reuse of advances that have been 
made by many people (the majority outside of the authors' own group) who work in 
text processing for biomedicine and other areas. GATE is available online <1> 
under GNU open source licences and runs on all major operating systems. Support 
is available from an active user and developer community and also on a 
commercial basis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002854
PMCID: PMC3567135
PMID: 23408875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.