341. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 May 11;7:27. doi: 10.1186/s13326-016-0070-4. 
eCollection 2016.

Filtering large-scale event collections using a combination of supervised and 
unsupervised learning for event trigger classification.

Mehryary F(1), Kaewphan S(2), Hakala K(1), Ginter F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Technology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland ; 
The University of Turku Graduate School (UTUGS), University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.
(2)Department of Information Technology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland ; 
The University of Turku Graduate School (UTUGS), University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland ; Turku Centre for Computer Science (TUCS), Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Information Technology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Biomedical event extraction is one of the key tasks in biomedical 
text mining, supporting various applications such as database curation and 
hypothesis generation. Several systems, some of which have been applied at a 
large scale, have been introduced to solve this task. Past studies have shown 
that the identification of the phrases describing biological processes, also 
known as trigger detection, is a crucial part of event extraction, and notable 
overall performance gains can be obtained by solely focusing on this sub-task. 
In this paper we propose a novel approach for filtering falsely identified 
triggers from large-scale event databases, thus improving the quality of 
knowledge extraction.
METHODS: Our method relies on state-of-the-art word embeddings, event statistics 
gathered from the whole biomedical literature, and both supervised and 
unsupervised machine learning techniques. We focus on EVEX, an event database 
covering the whole PubMed and PubMed Central Open Access literature containing 
more than 40 million extracted events. The top most frequent EVEX trigger words 
are hierarchically clustered, and the resulting cluster tree is pruned to 
identify words that can never act as triggers regardless of their context. For 
rarely occurring trigger words we introduce a supervised approach trained on the 
combination of trigger word classification produced by the unsupervised 
clustering method and manual annotation.
RESULTS: The method is evaluated on the official test set of BioNLP Shared Task 
on Event Extraction. The evaluation shows that the method can be used to improve 
the performance of the state-of-the-art event extraction systems. This 
successful effort also translates into removing 1,338,075 of potentially 
incorrect events from EVEX, thus greatly improving the quality of the data. The 
method is not solely bound to the EVEX resource and can be thus used to improve 
the quality of any event extraction system or database.
AVAILABILITY: The data and source code for this work are available at: 
http://bionlp-www.utu.fi/trigger-clustering/.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-016-0070-4
PMCID: PMC4864999
PMID: 27175227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]