506. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 17;14(12):e0226176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226176. 
eCollection 2019.

Menagerie: A text-mining tool to support animal-human translation in 
neurodegeneration research.

Zeiss CJ(1), Shin D(2), Vander Wyk B(3), Beck AP(4), Zatz N(5), Sneiderman 
CA(2), Kilicoglu H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, United States of America.
(2)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library 
of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut, United States of America.

Discovery studies in animals constitute a cornerstone of biomedical research, 
but suffer from lack of generalizability to human populations. We propose that 
large-scale interrogation of these data could reveal patterns of animal use that 
could narrow the translational divide. We describe a text-mining approach that 
extracts translationally useful data from PubMed abstracts. These comprise six 
modules: species, model, genes, interventions/disease modifiers, overall outcome 
and functional outcome measures. Existing National Library of Medicine natural 
language processing tools (SemRep, GNormPlus and the Chemical annotator) 
underpin the program and are further augmented by various rules, term lists, and 
machine learning models. Evaluation of the program using a 98-abstract test set 
achieved F1 scores ranging from 0.75-0.95 across all modules, and exceeded F1 
scores obtained from comparable baseline programs. Next, the program was applied 
to a larger 14,481 abstract data set (2008-2017). Expected and previously 
identified patterns of species and model use for the field were obtained. As 
previously noted, the majority of studies reported promising outcomes. 
Longitudinal patterns of intervention type or gene mentions were demonstrated, 
and patterns of animal model use characteristic of the Parkinson's disease field 
were confirmed. The primary function of the program is to overcome low external 
validity of animal model systems by aggregating evidence across a diversity of 
models that capture different aspects of a multifaceted cellular process. Some 
aspects of the tool are generalizable, whereas others are field-specific. In the 
initial version presented here, we demonstrate proof of concept within a single 
disease area, Parkinson's disease. However, the program can be expanded in 
modular fashion to support a wider range of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226176
PMCID: PMC6917268
PMID: 31846471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.