560. BMC Bioinformatics. 2004 Oct 7;5:146. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-5-146.

Tools for loading MEDLINE into a local relational database.

Oliver DE(1), Bhalotia G, Schwartz AS, Altman RB, Hearst MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 
oliver@SMI.Stanford.EDU <oliver@SMI.Stanford.EDU>

BACKGROUND: Researchers who use MEDLINE for text mining, information extraction, 
or natural language processing may benefit from having a copy of MEDLINE that 
they can manage locally. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) distributes 
MEDLINE in eXtensible Markup Language (XML)-formatted text files, but it is 
difficult to query MEDLINE in that format. We have developed software tools to 
parse the MEDLINE data files and load their contents into a relational database. 
Although the task is conceptually straightforward, the size and scope of MEDLINE 
make the task nontrivial. Given the increasing importance of text analysis in 
biology and medicine, we believe a local installation of MEDLINE will provide 
helpful computing infrastructure for researchers.
RESULTS: We developed three software packages that parse and load MEDLINE, and 
ran each package to install separate instances of the MEDLINE database. For each 
installation, we collected data on loading time and disk-space utilization to 
provide examples of the process in different settings. Settings differed in 
terms of commercial database-management system (IBM DB2 or Oracle 9i), processor 
(Intel or Sun), programming language of installation software (Java or Perl), 
and methods employed in different versions of the software. The loading times 
for the three installations were 76 hours, 196 hours, and 132 hours, and 
disk-space utilization was 46.3 GB, 37.7 GB, and 31.6 GB, respectively. Loading 
times varied due to a variety of differences among the systems. Loading time 
also depended on whether data were written to intermediate files or not, and on 
whether input files were processed in sequence or in parallel. Disk-space 
utilization depended on the number of MEDLINE files processed, amount of 
indexing, and whether abstracts were stored as character large objects or 
truncated.
CONCLUSIONS: Relational database (RDBMS) technology supports indexing and 
querying of very large datasets, and can accommodate a locally stored version of 
MEDLINE. RDBMS systems support a wide range of queries and facilitate certain 
tasks that are not directly supported by the application programming interface 
to PubMed. Because there is variation in hardware, software, and network 
infrastructures across sites, we cannot predict the exact time required for a 
user to load MEDLINE, but our results suggest that performance of the software 
is reasonable. Our database schemas and conversion software are publicly 
available at http://biotext.berkeley.edu.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-5-146
PMCID: PMC524480
PMID: 15471541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]