358. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2006:64-75.

PhenoGO: assigning phenotypic context to gene ontology annotations with natural 
language processing.

Lussier Y(1), Borlawsky T, Rappaport D, Liu Y, Friedman C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia Center for Systems Biology, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Natural language processing (NLP) is a high throughput technology because it can 
process vast quantities of text within a reasonable time period. It has the 
potential to substantially facilitate biomedical research by extracting, 
linking, and organizing massive amounts of information that occur in biomedical 
journal articles as well as in textual fields of biological databases. Until 
recently, much of the work in biological NLP and text mining has revolved around 
recognizing the occurrence of biomolecular entities in articles, and in 
extracting particular relationships among the entities. Now, researchers have 
recognized a need to link the extracted information to ontologies or knowledge 
bases, which is a more difficult task. One such knowledge base is Gene Ontology 
annotations (GOA), which significantly increases semantic computations over the 
function, cellular components and processes of genes. For multicellular 
organisms, these annotations can be refined with phenotypic context, such as the 
cell type, tissue, and organ because establishing phenotypic contexts in which a 
gene is expressed is a crucial step for understanding the development and the 
molecular underpinning of the pathophysiology of diseases. In this paper, we 
propose a system, PhenoGO, which automatically augments annotations in GOA with 
additional context. PhenoGO utilizes an existing NLP system, called BioMedLEE, 
an existing knowledge-based phenotype organizer system (PhenOS) in conjunction 
with MeSH indexing and established biomedical ontologies. More specifically, 
PhenoGO adds phenotypic contextual information to existing associations between 
gene products and GO terms as specified in GOA. The system also maps the context 
to identifiers that are associated with different biomedical ontologies, 
including the UMLS, Cell Ontology, Mouse Anatomy, NCBI taxonomy, GO, and 
Mammalian Phenotype Ontology. In addition, PhenoGO was evaluated for coding of 
anatomical and cellular information and assigning the coded phenotypes to the 
correct GOA; results obtained show that PhenoGO has a precision of 91% and 
recall of 92%, demonstrating that the PhenoGO NLP system can accurately encode a 
large number of anatomical and cellular ontologies to GO annotations. The 
PhenoGO Database may be accessed at the following URL: http://www.phenoGO.org

PMCID: PMC2906243
PMID: 17094228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]