566. Appl Clin Inform. 2017 Feb 1;8(1):108-121. doi: 10.4338/ACI-2016-08-RA-0139.

Leveraging the Value of Human Relationships to Improve Health Outcomes. Lessons 
learned from the OpenMRS Electronic Health Record System.

Kasthurirathne SN(1), Mamlin BW, Cullen T.

Author information:
(1)Suranga N. Kasthurirathne, Indiana University School of Informatics and 
Computing, Indianapolis, IN, Email: snkasthu@iupui.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Despite significant awareness on the value of leveraging patient 
relationships across the healthcare continuum, there is no research on the 
potential of using Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems to store structured 
patient relationship data, or its impact on enabling better healthcare. We 
sought to identify which EHR systems supported effective patient relationship 
data collection, and for systems that do, what types of relationship data is 
collected, how this data is used, and the perceived value of doing so.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a literature search to identify EHR systems 
that supported patient relationship data collection. Based on our results, we 
defined attributes of an effective patient relationship model. The Open Medical 
Record System (OpenMRS), an open source medical record platform for underserved 
settings met our eligibility criteria for effective patient relationship 
collection. We performed a survey to understand how the OpenMRS patient 
relationship model was used, and how it brought value to implementers.
RESULTS: The OpenMRS patient relationship model has won widespread adoption 
across many implementations and is perceived to be valuable in enabling better 
health care delivery. Patient relationship information is widely used for 
community health programs and enabling chronic care. Additionally, many OpenMRS 
implementers were using this feature to collect custom relationship types for 
implementation specific needs.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe that flexible patient relationship data collection is 
critical for better healthcare, and can inform community care and chronic care 
initiatives across the world. Additionally, patient relationship data could also 
be leveraged for many other initiatives such as patient centric care and in the 
field of precision medicine.

DOI: 10.4338/ACI-2016-08-RA-0139
PMCID: PMC5373756
PMID: 28144679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement Each of the 
authors play various voluntary (unpaid) roles within the OpenMRS project.