329. J Med Internet Res. 2020 Feb 19;22(2):e13855. doi: 10.2196/13855.

A Framework for Applying Natural Language Processing in Digital Health 
Interventions.

Funk B(#)(1), Sadeh-Sharvit S(#)(2)(3), Fitzsimmons-Craft EE(4), Trockel MT(3), 
Monterubio GE(4), Goel NJ(2)(3), Balantekin KN(4)(5), Eichen DM(4)(6), Flatt 
RE(2)(3)(7), Firebaugh ML(4), Jacobi C(8), Graham AK(9), Hoogendoorn M(10), 
Wilfley DE(4), Taylor CB(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Leuphana University, Institute of Information Systems, Lueneburg, Germany.
(2)Palo Alto University, Center for m2Health, Palo Alto, CA, United States.
(3)Stanford University, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Stanford, CA, United States.
(4)Washington University in St Louis, Department of Psychiatry, St Louis, MO, 
United States.
(5)University at Buffalo, Department of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, 
Buffalo, NY, United States.
(6)University of California San Diego, Department of Pediatrics, San Diego, CA, 
United States.
(7)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Psychology and 
Neurosciences, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(8)Technische Universität, Institute of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 
Dresden, Germany.
(9)Northwestern University, Department of Medical Social Sciences, Chicago, IL, 
United States.
(10)Vrije Universiteit, Department of Computer Science, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Digital health interventions (DHIs) are poised to reduce target 
symptoms in a scalable, affordable, and empirically supported way. DHIs that 
involve coaching or clinical support often collect text data from 2 sources: (1) 
open correspondence between users and the trained practitioners supporting them 
through a messaging system and (2) text data recorded during the intervention by 
users, such as diary entries. Natural language processing (NLP) offers methods 
for analyzing text, augmenting the understanding of intervention effects, and 
informing therapeutic decision making.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to present a technical framework that supports the 
automated analysis of both types of text data often present in DHIs. This 
framework generates text features and helps to build statistical models to 
predict target variables, including user engagement, symptom change, and 
therapeutic outcomes.
METHODS: We first discussed various NLP techniques and demonstrated how they are 
implemented in the presented framework. We then applied the framework in a case 
study of the Healthy Body Image Program, a Web-based intervention trial for 
eating disorders (EDs). A total of 372 participants who screened positive for an 
ED received a DHI aimed at reducing ED psychopathology (including binge eating 
and purging behaviors) and improving body image. These users generated 37,228 
intervention text snippets and exchanged 4285 user-coach messages, which were 
analyzed using the proposed model.
RESULTS: We applied the framework to predict binge eating behavior, resulting in 
an area under the curve between 0.57 (when applied to new users) and 0.72 (when 
applied to new symptom reports of known users). In addition, initial evidence 
indicated that specific text features predicted the therapeutic outcome of 
reducing ED symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The case study demonstrates the usefulness of a structured approach 
to text data analytics. NLP techniques improve the prediction of symptom changes 
in DHIs. We present a technical framework that can be easily applied in other 
clinical trials and clinical presentations and encourage other groups to apply 
the framework in similar contexts.

©Burkhardt Funk, Shiri Sadeh-Sharvit, Ellen E Fitzsimmons-Craft, Mickey Todd 
Trockel, Grace E Monterubio, Neha J Goel, Katherine N Balantekin, Dawn M Eichen, 
Rachael E Flatt, Marie-Laure Firebaugh, Corinna Jacobi, Andrea K Graham, Mark 
Hoogendoorn, Denise E Wilfley, C Barr Taylor. Originally published in the 
Journal of Medical Internet Research (http://www.jmir.org), 19.02.2020.

DOI: 10.2196/13855
PMCID: PMC7059510
PMID: 32130118

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.