27. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2019 Apr 9;19(Suppl 2):53. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-019-0760-9.

An ontological framework for the formalization, organization and usage of 
TCM-Knowledge.

Long H(1), Zhu Y(2), Jia L(3), Gao B(3), Liu J(3), Liu L(3), Herre H(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology (IMISE) 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Information on Traditional Chinese Medicine, China Academy of 
Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. zhuyan166@126.com.
(3)Institute of Information on Traditional Chinese Medicine, China Academy of 
Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Institute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology (IMISE) 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. heinrich.herre@imise.uni-leipzig.de.

BACKGROUND: The traditional Chinese Medicine Language System (TCMLS) is a 
large-scale terminology system, developed from 2002 on by the Institute of 
Information of Traditional Chinese Medicine (IITCM). Until now, more than 
120,000 concepts, 300,000 terms and 1.27 million semantic relational links are 
included. Its top-level framework, called TCMLS-semantic network (SN), provides 
an important basis for the standardization and mapping of traditional Chinese 
Medicine (TCM) terminology systems. Though, many data produced and stored in 
TCMLS have poor quality for historical reasons or because of human factors. 
There is a large number of classification errors or inconsistent expressions of 
terms remained in the current TCMLS- SN, which hamper an efficient utilization 
of the data stored in TCMLS in practical applications.
METHODS: We start with analyzing the technical specification based on TCMLS, 
considering some obvious classification errors and problems of ambiguity of 
semantic expressions in TCMLS-SN, followed with using a top-down approach for 
building a middle level ontology which is based on the framework General Formal 
Ontology (GFO), take into account the compatibility with TCM related concepts, 
turn out the results of a modification of the current TCMLS-SN, called GFO-TCM.
RESULTS: Through comparison with TCMLS-SN, according to viewpoints of GFO, some 
semantic types and relations were reconstructed within GFO-TCM. We propose a 
middle level ontology for TCMLS which may support entailment and ensure 
coherence, we also draw out a mapping which possess a more reasonable framework 
with a unified semantic criterion, it is application scenarios oriented and can 
be further updated and extended.
CONCLUSIONS: The goal is to construct a formal middle-level ontology that is 
compatible with both the traditional medical terminology system and modern 
medical terminology standards. it is intended to satisfy functional requirements 
which are relevant for natural language processing, information extraction, 
semantic retrieval, clinical decision support in the field of traditional 
Chinese medicine. It also provides a foundation and methodology for building a 
large-scale, unified semantic and extensible knowledge graph platform.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-019-0760-9
PMCID: PMC6454592
PMID: 30961578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declared that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.