3. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Mar 5;19(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2079-4.

Natural language processing in text mining for structural modeling of protein 
complexes.

Badal VD(1), Kundrotas PJ(2), Vakser IA(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Biology and Department of Molecular Biosciences, The 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, 66047, USA.
(2)Center for Computational Biology and Department of Molecular Biosciences, The 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, 66047, USA. pkundro@ku.edu.
(3)Center for Computational Biology and Department of Molecular Biosciences, The 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, 66047, USA. vakser@ku.edu.

BACKGROUND: Structural modeling of protein-protein interactions produces a large 
number of putative configurations of the protein complexes. Identification of 
the near-native models among them is a serious challenge. Publicly available 
results of biomedical research may provide constraints on the binding mode, 
which can be essential for the docking. Our text-mining (TM) tool, which 
extracts binding site residues from the PubMed abstracts, was successfully 
applied to protein docking (Badal et al., PLoS Comput Biol, 2015; 11: e1004630). 
Still, many extracted residues were not relevant to the docking.
RESULTS: We present an extension of the TM tool, which utilizes natural language 
processing (NLP) for analyzing the context of the residue occurrence. The 
procedure was tested using generic and specialized dictionaries. The results 
showed that the keyword dictionaries designed for identification of protein 
interactions are not adequate for the TM prediction of the binding mode. 
However, our dictionary designed to distinguish keywords relevant to the protein 
binding sites led to considerable improvement in the TM performance. We 
investigated the utility of several methods of context analysis, based on 
dissection of the sentence parse trees. The machine learning-based NLP filtered 
the pool of the mined residues significantly more efficiently than the 
rule-based NLP. Constraints generated by NLP were tested in docking of unbound 
proteins from the DOCKGROUND X-ray benchmark set 4. The output of the global 
low-resolution docking scan was post-processed, separately, by constraints from 
the basic TM, constraints re-ranked by NLP, and the reference constraints. The 
quality of a match was assessed by the interface root-mean-square deviation. The 
results showed significant improvement of the docking output when using the 
constraints generated by the advanced TM with NLP.
CONCLUSIONS: The basic TM procedure for extracting protein-protein binding site 
residues from the PubMed abstracts was significantly advanced by the deep 
parsing (NLP techniques for contextual analysis) in purging of the initial pool 
of the extracted residues. Benchmarking showed a substantial increase of the 
docking success rate based on the constraints generated by the advanced TM with 
NLP.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2079-4
PMCID: PMC5838950
PMID: 29506465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.