270. Front Public Health. 2019 Apr 12;7:81. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00081. 
eCollection 2019.

Crowdbreaks: Tracking Health Trends Using Public Social Media Data and 
Crowdsourcing.

Müller MM(1)(2)(3), Salathé M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Digital Epidemiology Lab, EPFL, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)School of Life Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.

In the past decade, tracking health trends using social media data has shown 
great promise, due to a powerful combination of massive adoption of social media 
around the world, and increasingly potent hardware and software that enables us 
to work with these new big data streams. At the same time, many challenging 
problems have been identified. First, there is often a mismatch between how 
rapidly online data can change, and how rapidly algorithms are updated, which 
means that there is limited reusability for algorithms trained on past data as 
their performance decreases over time. Second, much of the work is focusing on 
specific issues during a specific past period in time, even though public health 
institutions would need flexible tools to assess multiple evolving situations in 
real time. Third, most tools providing such capabilities are proprietary systems 
with little algorithmic or data transparency, and thus little buy-in from the 
global public health and research community. Here, we introduce Crowdbreaks, an 
open platform which allows tracking of health trends by making use of continuous 
crowdsourced labeling of public social media content. The system is built in a 
way which automatizes the typical workflow from data collection, filtering, 
labeling and training of machine learning classifiers and therefore can greatly 
accelerate the research process in the public health domain. This work describes 
the technical aspects of the platform, thereby covering the functionalities at 
its current state and exploring its future use cases and extensions.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00081
PMCID: PMC6476276
PMID: 31037238