445. Interact J Med Res. 2013 Jul 22;2(2):e13. doi: 10.2196/ijmr.2480.

Scalable decision support at the point of care: a substitutable electronic 
health record app for monitoring medication adherence.

Bosl W(1), Mandel J, Jonikas M, Ramoni RB, Kohane IS, Mandl KD.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Informatics Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. william.bosl@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Non-adherence to prescribed medications is a serious health problem 
in the United States, costing an estimated $100 billion per year. While poor 
adherence should be addressable with point of care health information 
technology, integrating new solutions with existing electronic health records 
(EHR) systems require customization within each organization, which is difficult 
because of the monolithic software design of most EHR products.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to create a published algorithm for 
predicting medication adherence problems easily accessible at the point of care 
through a Web application that runs on the Substitutable Medical Apps, Reusuable 
Technologies (SMART) platform. The SMART platform is an emerging framework that 
enables EHR systems to behave as "iPhone like platforms" by exhibiting an 
application programming interface for easy addition and deletion of third party 
apps. The app is presented as a point of care solution to monitoring medication 
adherence as well as a sufficiently general, modular application that may serve 
as an example and template for other SMART apps.
METHODS: The widely used, open source Django framework was used together with 
the SMART platform to create the interoperable components of this app. Django 
uses Python as its core programming language. This allows statistical and 
mathematical modules to be created from a large array of Python numerical 
libraries and assembled together with the core app to create flexible and 
sophisticated EHR functionality. Algorithms that predict individual adherence 
are derived from a retrospective study of dispensed medication claims from a 
large private insurance plan. Patients' prescription fill information is 
accessed through the SMART framework and the embedded algorithms compute 
adherence information, including predicted adherence one year after the first 
prescription fill. Open source graphing software is used to display patient 
medication information and the results of statistical prediction of future 
adherence on a clinician-facing Web interface.
RESULTS: The user interface allows the physician to quickly review all 
medications in a patient record for potential non-adherence problems. A 
gap-check and current medication possession ratio (MPR) threshold test are 
applied to all medications in the record to test for current non-adherence. 
Predictions of 1-year non-adherence are made for certain drug classes for which 
external data was available. Information is presented graphically to indicate 
present non-adherence, or predicted non-adherence at one year, based on early 
prescription fulfillment patterns. The MPR Monitor app is installed in the SMART 
reference container as the "MPR Monitor", where it is publically available for 
use and testing. MPR is an acronym for Medication Possession Ratio, a commonly 
used measure of adherence to a prescribed medication regime. This app may be 
used as an example for creating additional functionality by replacing 
statistical and display algorithms with new code in a cycle of rapid prototyping 
and implementation or as a framework for a new SMART app.
CONCLUSIONS: The MPR Monitor app is a useful pilot project for monitoring 
medication adherence. It also provides an example that integrates several open 
source software components, including the Python-based Django Web framework and 
python-based graphics, to build a SMART app that allows complex decision support 
methods to be encapsulated to enhance EHR functionality.

DOI: 10.2196/ijmr.2480
PMCID: PMC3815431
PMID: 23876796

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.