9. Int J Med Inform. 2019 Aug;128:62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.04.017. Epub 
2019 May 25.

Detecting adverse drug reactions in discharge summaries of electronic medical 
records using Readpeer.

Tang Y(1), Yang J(1), Ang PS(2), Dorajoo SR(2), Foo B(2), Soh S(2), Tan SH(2), 
Tham MY(2), Ye Q(3), Shek L(4), Sung C(5), Tung A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Vigilance & Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore.
(3)Vigilance & Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore; Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science 
and Technology, Singapore.
(4)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, National 
University Health System, Singapore.
(5)Vigilance & Compliance Branch, Health Products Regulation Group, Health 
Sciences Authority, Singapore; Health Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS 
Medical School, Singapore.
(6)Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: anthony@comp.nus.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Hospital discharge summaries offer a potentially rich resource to 
enhance pharmacovigilance efforts to evaluate drug safety in real-world clinical 
practice. However, it is infeasible for experts to read through all discharge 
summaries to find cases of drug-adverse event (AE) relations.
PURPOSE: The objective of this paper is to develop a natural language processing 
(NLP) framework to detect drug-AE relations from unstructured hospital discharge 
summaries.
BASIC PROCEDURES: An NLP algorithm was designed using customized dictionaries of 
drugs, adverse event (AE) terms, and rules based on trigger phrases, negations, 
fuzzy logic and word distances to recognize drug, AE terms and to detect drug-AE 
relations. Furthermore, a customized annotation tool was developed to facilitate 
expert review of discharge summaries from a tertiary hospital in Singapore in 
2011.
MAIN FINDINGS: A total of 33 trial sets with 50 to 100 records per set were 
evaluated (1620 discharge summaries) by our algorithm and reviewed by 
pharmacovigilance experts. After every 6 trial sets, drug and AE dictionaries 
were updated, and rules were modified to improve the system. Excellent 
performance was achieved for drug and AE entity recognition with over 92% 
precision and recall. On the final 6 sets of discharge summaries (600 records), 
our algorithm achieved 75% precision and 59% recall for identification of valid 
drug-AE relations.
PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS: Adverse drug reactions are a significant contributor to 
health care costs and utilization. Our algorithm is not restricted to particular 
drugs, drug classes or specific medical specialties, which is an important 
attribute for a national regulatory authority to carry out comprehensive safety 
monitoring of drug products. Drug and AE dictionaries may be updated 
periodically to ensure that the tool remains relevant for performing 
surveillance activities. The development of the algorithm, and the ease of 
reviewing and correcting the results of the algorithm as part of an iterative 
machine learning process, is an important step towards use of hospital discharge 
summaries for an active pharmacovigilance program.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.04.017
PMID: 31160013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]