139. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 3;12(3):e0173132. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173132. 
eCollection 2017.

Text mining for improved exposure assessment.

Larsson K(1), Baker S(2), Silins I(1), Guo Y(2), Stenius U(1), Korhonen A(2)(3), 
Berglund M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Language Technology Lab, DTAL, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Chemical exposure assessments are based on information collected via different 
methods, such as biomonitoring, personal monitoring, environmental monitoring 
and questionnaires. The vast amount of chemical-specific exposure information 
available from web-based databases, such as PubMed, is undoubtedly a great asset 
to the scientific community. However, manual retrieval of relevant published 
information is an extremely time consuming task and overviewing the data is 
nearly impossible. Here, we present the development of an automatic classifier 
for chemical exposure information. First, nearly 3700 abstracts were manually 
annotated by an expert in exposure sciences according to a taxonomy exclusively 
created for exposure information. Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques 
were used to extract semantic and syntactic features relevant to chemical 
exposure text. Using these features, we trained a supervised machine learning 
algorithm to automatically classify PubMed abstracts according to the exposure 
taxonomy. The resulting classifier demonstrates good performance in the 
intrinsic evaluation. We also show that the classifier improves information 
retrieval of chemical exposure data compared to keyword-based PubMed searches. 
Case studies demonstrate that the classifier can be used to assist researchers 
by facilitating information retrieval and classification, enabling data gap 
recognition and overviewing available scientific literature using 
chemical-specific publication profiles. Finally, we identify challenges to be 
addressed in future development of the system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173132
PMCID: PMC5336247
PMID: 28257498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.