31. JMIR Med Inform. 2019 Oct 31;7(4):e15980. doi: 10.2196/15980.

Cohort Selection for Clinical Trials From Longitudinal Patient Records: Text 
Mining Approach.

Spasic I(1), Krzeminski D(2), Corcoran P(1), Balinsky A(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom.
(2)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Mathematics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials are an important step in introducing new 
interventions into clinical practice by generating data on their safety and 
efficacy. Clinical trials need to ensure that participants are similar so that 
the findings can be attributed to the interventions studied and not to some 
other factors. Therefore, each clinical trial defines eligibility criteria, 
which describe characteristics that must be shared by the participants. 
Unfortunately, the complexities of eligibility criteria may not allow them to be 
translated directly into readily executable database queries. Instead, they may 
require careful analysis of the narrative sections of medical records. Manual 
screening of medical records is time consuming, thus negatively affecting the 
timeliness of the recruitment process.
OBJECTIVE: Track 1 of the 2018 National Natural Language Processing Clinical 
Challenge focused on the task of cohort selection for clinical trials, aiming to 
answer the following question: Can natural language processing be applied to 
narrative medical records to identify patients who meet eligibility criteria for 
clinical trials? The task required the participating systems to analyze 
longitudinal patient records to determine if the corresponding patients met the 
given eligibility criteria. We aimed to describe a system developed to address 
this task.
METHODS: Our system consisted of 13 classifiers, one for each eligibility 
criterion. All classifiers used a bag-of-words document representation model. To 
prevent the loss of relevant contextual information associated with such 
representation, a pattern-matching approach was used to extract 
context-sensitive features. They were embedded back into the text as lexically 
distinguishable tokens, which were consequently featured in the bag-of-words 
representation. Supervised machine learning was chosen wherever a sufficient 
number of both positive and negative instances was available to learn from. A 
rule-based approach focusing on a small set of relevant features was chosen for 
the remaining criteria.
RESULTS: The system was evaluated using microaveraged F measure. Overall, 4 
machine algorithms, including support vector machine, logistic regression, naïve 
Bayesian classifier, and gradient tree boosting (GTB), were evaluated on the 
training data using 10-fold cross-validation. Overall, GTB demonstrated the most 
consistent performance. Its performance peaked when oversampling was used to 
balance the training data. The final evaluation was performed on previously 
unseen test data. On average, the F measure of 89.04% was comparable to 3 of the 
top ranked performances in the shared task (91.11%, 90.28%, and 90.21%). With an 
F measure of 88.14%, we significantly outperformed these systems (81.03%, 
78.50%, and 70.81%) in identifying patients with advanced coronary artery 
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The holdout evaluation provides evidence that our system was able 
to identify eligible patients for the given clinical trial with high accuracy. 
Our approach demonstrates how rule-based knowledge infusion can improve the 
performance of machine learning algorithms even when trained on a relatively 
small dataset.

©Irena Spasic, Dominik Krzeminski, Padraig Corcoran, Alexander Balinsky. 
Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 
31.10.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/15980
PMCID: PMC6913747
PMID: 31674914

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.