361. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Sep 17;19(1):328. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2316-x.

A document level neural model integrated domain knowledge for chemical-induced 
disease relations.

Zheng W(1)(2), Lin H(3), Liu X(1), Xu B(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, China.
(2)College of Software, Dalian JiaoTong University, Dalian, China.
(3)College of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, China. hflin@dlut.edu.cn.
(4)College of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, China. xubo@mail.dlut.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The effective combination of texts and knowledge may improve 
performances of natural language processing tasks. For the recognition of 
chemical-induced disease (CID) relations which may span sentence boundaries in 
an article, although existing CID systems explored the utilization for knowledge 
bases, the effects of different knowledge on the identification of a special CID 
haven't been distinguished by these systems. Moreover, systems based on neural 
network only constructed sentence or mention level models.
RESULTS: In this work, we proposed an effective document level neural model 
integrated domain knowledge to extract CID relations from biomedical articles. 
Basic semantic information of an article with respect to a special CID candidate 
pair was learned from the document level sub-network module. Furthermore, 
knowledge attention depending on the representation of the article was proposed 
to distinguish the influences of different knowledge on the special CID pair and 
then the final representation of knowledge was formed by aggregating weighed 
knowledge. Finally, the integrated representations of texts and knowledge were 
passed to a softmax classifier to perform the CID recognition. Experimental 
results on the chemical-disease relation corpus proposed by BioCreative V show 
that our proposed system integrated knowledge achieves a good overall 
performance compared with other state-of-the-art systems.
CONCLUSIONS: Experimental analyses demonstrate that the introduced attention 
mechanism on domain knowledge plays a significant role in distinguishing 
influences of different knowledge on the judgment for a special CID relation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2316-x
PMCID: PMC6142695
PMID: 30223767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.