456. WMJ. 2010 Dec;109(6):335-40.

A demonstration project for using the electronic health record to identify and 
treat tobacco users.

Lindholm C(1), Adsit R, Bain P, Reber PM, Brein T, Redmond L, Smith SS, Fiore 
MC.

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin, Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention, 
Madison, WI 53711-2027, USA.

BACKGROUND: While the majority of smokers visit a primary care physician each 
year, only a small proportion of them receive evidence-based tobacco dependence 
treatment. The electronic health record (EHR) provides an opportunity to prompt 
clinicians to deliver tobacco dependence treatment in primary care.
METHODS: Over 1 year, Dean Health Systems worked with the University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health to modify the existing Dean EHR 
system (Epic Systems Corp, Verona, Wisconsin) to improve identification and 
treatment of adult smokers visiting primary care clinics. Modifications included 
evidence-based prompts that helped guide medical assistants to identify smokers 
and clinicians to deliver a brief tobacco cessation intervention (medication and 
Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line referral). Eighteen primary care clinics provided 
data 1 year before and 1 year after implementing the EHR modifications.
RESULTS: A higher percentage of adult patients had their tobacco use status 
identified after EHR modification compared to pre-implementation (71.6% versus 
78.4%, P < .001). During the post-implementation year, 6.3% of adult smokers 
were prescribed tobacco cessation medication, 2.5% of adult smokers had 
documentation of counseling, and 1.5% of adult smokers had counseling billed 
(pre-implementation data not available).
CONCLUSIONS: This demonstration project showed that a large health care system 
can increase the delivery of tobacco dependence treatment interventions 
(increased identification of smokers and relatively high rates of delivering 
specific tobacco dependence clinical interventions) building on an existing EHR 
platform. The project demonstrated that brief, evidence-based tobacco dependence 
interventions can be incorporated into primary care, especially when the EHR is 
used to improve clinic workflow.

PMCID: PMC3587763
PMID: 21287886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]