402. J Biomed Inform. 2013 Dec;46(6):977-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.06.007. Epub 
2013 Jun 25.

Sharing clinical decisions for multimorbidity case management using social 
network and open-source tools.

Martínez-García A(1), Moreno-Conde A, Jódar-Sánchez F, Leal S, Parra C.

Author information:
(1)Technological Innovation Group, Virgen del Rocío University Hospital, Manuel 
Siurot Avenue, s/n, 41013 Seville, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Social networks applied through Web 2.0 tools have gained 
importance in health domain, because they produce improvements on the 
communication and coordination capabilities among health professionals. This is 
highly relevant for multimorbidity patients care because there is a large number 
of health professionals in charge of patient care, and this requires to obtain 
clinical consensus in their decisions. Our objective is to develop a tool for 
collaborative work among health professionals for multimorbidity patient care. 
We describe the architecture to incorporate decision support functionalities in 
a social network tool to enable the adoption of shared decisions among health 
professionals from different care levels. As part of the first stage of the 
project, this paper describes the results obtained in a pilot study about 
acceptance and use of the social network component in our healthcare setting.
METHODS: At Virgen del Rocío University Hospital we have designed and developed 
the Shared Care Platform (SCP) to provide support in the continuity of care for 
multimorbidity patients. The SCP has two consecutively developed components: 
social network component, called Clinical Wall, and Clinical Decision Support 
(CDS) system. The Clinical Wall contains a record where health professionals are 
able to debate and define shared decisions. We conducted a pilot study to assess 
the use and acceptance of the SCP by healthcare professionals through 
questionnaire based on the theory of the Technology Acceptance Model.
RESULTS: In March 2012 we released and deployed the SCP, but only with the 
social network component. The pilot project lasted 6 months in the hospital and 
2 primary care centers. From March to September 2012 we created 16 records in 
the Clinical Wall, all with a high priority. A total of 10 professionals took 
part in the exchange of messages: 3 internists and 7 general practitioners 
generated 33 messages. 12 of the 16 record (75%) were answered by the 
destination health professionals. The professionals valued positively all the 
items in the questionnaire. As part of the SCP, opensource tools for CDS will be 
incorporated to provide recommendations for medication and problem interactions, 
as well as to calculate indexes or scales from validated questionnaires. They 
will receive the patient summary information provided by the regional Electronic 
Health Record system through a web service with the information defined 
according to the virtual Medical Record specification.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical Wall has been developed to allow communication and 
coordination between the healthcare professionals involved in multimorbidity 
patient care. Agreed decisions were about coordination for appointment changing, 
patient conditions, diagnosis tests, and prescription changes and renewal. The 
application of interoperability standards and open source software can bridge 
the gap between knowledge and clinical practice, while enabling interoperability 
and scalability. Open source with the social network encourages adoption and 
facilitates collaboration. Although the results obtained for use indicators are 
still not as high as it was expected, based on the promising results obtained in 
the acceptance questionnaire of SMP, we expect that the new CDS tools will 
increase the use by the health professionals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.06.007
PMID: 23806275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]