14. BMC Bioinformatics. 2018 Jun 28;19(1):248. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2211-5.

FamPlex: a resource for entity recognition and relationship resolution of human 
protein families and complexes in biomedical text mining.

Bachman JA(1), Gyori BM(1), Sorger PK(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Ave, 
Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Ave, 
Boston, MA, 02115, USA. peter_sorger@hms.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: For automated reading of scientific publications to extract useful 
information about molecular mechanisms it is critical that genes, proteins and 
other entities be correctly associated with uniform identifiers, a process known 
as named entity linking or "grounding." Correct grounding is essential for 
resolving relationships among mined information, curated interaction databases, 
and biological datasets. The accuracy of this process is largely dependent on 
the availability of machine-readable resources associating synonyms and 
abbreviations commonly found in biomedical literature with uniform identifiers.
RESULTS: In a task involving automated reading of ∼215,000 articles using the 
REACH event extraction software we found that grounding was disproportionately 
inaccurate for multi-protein families (e.g., "AKT") and complexes with multiple 
subunits (e.g."NF- κB"). To address this problem we constructed FamPlex, a 
manually curated resource defining protein families and complexes as they are 
commonly encountered in biomedical text. In FamPlex the gene-level constituents 
of families and complexes are defined in a flexible format allowing for 
multi-level, hierarchical membership. To create FamPlex, text strings 
corresponding to entities were identified empirically from literature and linked 
manually to uniform identifiers; these identifiers were also mapped to 
equivalent entries in multiple related databases. FamPlex also includes curated 
prefix and suffix patterns that improve named entity recognition and event 
extraction. Evaluation of REACH extractions on a test corpus of ∼54,000 articles 
showed that FamPlex significantly increased grounding accuracy for families and 
complexes (from 15 to 71%). The hierarchical organization of entities in FamPlex 
also made it possible to integrate otherwise unconnected mechanistic information 
across families, subfamilies, and individual proteins. Applications of FamPlex 
to the TRIPS/DRUM reading system and the Biocreative VI Bioentity Normalization 
Task dataset demonstrated the utility of FamPlex in other settings.
CONCLUSION: FamPlex is an effective resource for improving named entity 
recognition, grounding, and relationship resolution in automated reading of 
biomedical text. The content in FamPlex is available in both tabular and Open 
Biomedical Ontology formats at https://github.com/sorgerlab/famplex under the 
Creative Commons CC0 license and has been integrated into the TRIPS/DRUM and 
REACH reading systems.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-018-2211-5
PMCID: PMC6022344
PMID: 29954318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.