325. J Digit Imaging. 2020 Apr 21. doi: 10.1007/s10278-020-00342-0. Online ahead of 
print.

A Hybrid Reporting Platform for Extended RadLex Coding Combining Structured 
Reporting Templates and Natural Language Processing.

Jungmann F(1), Arnhold G(2), Kämpgen B(3), Jorg T(2), Düber C(2), Mildenberger 
P(2), Kloeckner R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Medical 
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Langenbeckst. 1, 55131, 
Mainz, Germany. florian.jungmann@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Medical 
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Langenbeckst. 1, 55131, 
Mainz, Germany.
(3)Empolis Information Management GmbH, Kaiserslautern, Germany.

Structured reporting is a favorable and sustainable form of reporting in 
radiology. Among its advantages are better presentation, clearer nomenclature, 
and higher quality. By using MRRT-compliant templates, the content of the 
categorized items (e.g., select fields) can be automatically stored in a 
database, which allows further research and quality analytics based on 
established ontologies like RadLex® linked to the items. Additionally, it is 
relevant to provide free-text input for descriptions of findings and impressions 
in complex imaging studies or for the information included with the clinical 
referral. So far, however, this unstructured content cannot be categorized. We 
developed a solution to analyze and code these free-text parts of the templates 
in our MRRT-compliant reporting platform, using natural language processing 
(NLP) with RadLex® terms in addition to the already categorized items. The 
established hybrid reporting concept is working successfully. The NLP tool 
provides RadLex® codes with modifiers (affirmed, speculated, negated). 
Radiologists can confirm or reject codes provided by NLP before finalizing the 
structured report. Furthermore, users can suggest RadLex® codes from free text 
that is not correctly coded with NLP or can suggest to change the modifier. 
Analyzing free-text fields took 1.23 s on average. Hybrid reporting enables 
coding of free-text information in our MRRT-compliant templates and thus 
increases the amount of categorized data that can be stored in the database. 
This enhances the possibilities for further analyses, such as correlating 
clinical information with radiological findings or storing high-quality 
structured information for machine-learning approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s10278-020-00342-0
PMID: 32318897