131. World Neurosurg. 2019 Jun;126:e190-e195. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.01.292. Epub 
2019 Feb 22.

Variance Reduction in Neurosurgical Practice: The Case for Analytics-Driven 
Decision Support in the Era of Big Data.

Stopa BM(1), Yan SC(1), Dasenbrock HH(1), Kim DH(2), Gormley WB(3).

Author information:
(1)Computational Neurosurgery Outcomes Center, Department of Neurological 
Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Computational Neurosurgery Outcomes Center, Department of Neurological 
Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address: wgormley@partners.org.

OBJECTIVE: Variance between providers in neurosurgery can lead to inefficiencies 
and poor patient outcomes. Evidence-based guidelines (EBGs) have been developed; 
however, they have not been well implemented into the clinician workflow. 
Therefore, clinicians have been left to make decisions with incomplete 
information. Equally underused are the electronic health records (EHRs), which 
house enormous amounts of health data, but the power of that "big data" has 
failed to be capitalized on.
METHODS: Early attempts at EBGs were rigid and nonadaptive; however, with the 
current advances in data informatics and machine learning algorithms, it is now 
possible to integrate "big data" and rapid data processing into clinical 
decision support tools. We have presented an overview of the background of EHRs 
and EBGs in neurosurgery and explored the possibility of integrating them to 
reduce unwanted variance.
RESULTS: As we strive toward variance reduction in healthcare, the integration 
of "big data" and EBGs for decision-making will be key. We have proposed that 
EHRs are an ideal platform for integrating EBGs into the clinician workflow and 
have presented as an example of a successful early generation model, Neurocore. 
With this approach, it will be possible to build EBGs into the EHR software, to 
continuously update and optimize EBGs according to the flow of patient data into 
the EHR, and to present data-driven clinical decision support at the point of 
care.
CONCLUSIONS: Variance reduction in neurosurgery through the integration of 
evidence-based decision support in EHRs will lead to improved patient safety, a 
reduction in medical errors, maximization of the use of the available data, and 
enhanced decision-making power for clinicians.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.01.292
PMID: 30797905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]