395. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2011 Apr 10;11:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-11-43.

Implementation of workflow engine technology to deliver basic clinical decision 
support functionality.

Huser V(1), Rasmussen LV, Oberg R, Starren JB.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Research Center, Marshfield Clinic, Marshfield, WI, 
USA. vojtech.huser@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Workflow engine technology represents a new class of software with 
the ability to graphically model step-based knowledge. We present application of 
this novel technology to the domain of clinical decision support. Successful 
implementation of decision support within an electronic health record (EHR) 
remains an unsolved research challenge. Previous research efforts were mostly 
based on healthcare-specific representation standards and execution engines and 
did not reach wide adoption. We focus on two challenges in decision support 
systems: the ability to test decision logic on retrospective data prior 
prospective deployment and the challenge of user-friendly representation of 
clinical logic.
RESULTS: We present our implementation of a workflow engine technology that 
addresses the two above-described challenges in delivering clinical decision 
support. Our system is based on a cross-industry standard of XML (extensible 
markup language) process definition language (XPDL). The core components of the 
system are a workflow editor for modeling clinical scenarios and a workflow 
engine for execution of those scenarios. We demonstrate, with an open-source and 
publicly available workflow suite, that clinical decision support logic can be 
executed on retrospective data. The same flowchart-based representation can also 
function in a prospective mode where the system can be integrated with an EHR 
system and respond to real-time clinical events. We limit the scope of our 
implementation to decision support content generation (which can be EHR system 
vendor independent). We do not focus on supporting complex decision support 
content delivery mechanisms due to lack of standardization of EHR systems in 
this area. We present results of our evaluation of the flowchart-based graphical 
notation as well as architectural evaluation of our implementation using an 
established evaluation framework for clinical decision support architecture.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe an implementation of a free workflow technology 
software suite (available at http://code.google.com/p/healthflow) and its 
application in the domain of clinical decision support. Our implementation 
seamlessly supports clinical logic testing on retrospective data and offers a 
user-friendly knowledge representation paradigm. With the presented software 
implementation, we demonstrate that workflow engine technology can provide a 
decision support platform which evaluates well against an established clinical 
decision support architecture evaluation framework. Due to cross-industry usage 
of workflow engine technology, we can expect significant future functionality 
enhancements that will further improve the technology's capacity to serve as a 
clinical decision support platform.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2288-11-43
PMCID: PMC3079703
PMID: 21477364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]