322. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2014 Mar-Apr;21(2):212-20. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002165. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Privacy preserving interactive record linkage (PPIRL).

Kum HC(1), Krishnamurthy A, Machanavajjhala A, Reiter MK, Ahalt S.

Author information:
(1)Population Informatics Research Group, Department of Computer Science, UNC-CH 
& Department of Health Policy and Management, Texas A&M Health Science Center, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Record linkage to integrate uncoordinated databases is critical in 
biomedical research using Big Data. Balancing privacy protection against the 
need for high quality record linkage requires a human-machine hybrid system to 
safely manage uncertainty in the ever changing streams of chaotic Big Data.
METHODS: In the computer science literature, private record linkage is the most 
published area. It investigates how to apply a known linkage function safely 
when linking two tables. However, in practice, the linkage function is rarely 
known. Thus, there are many data linkage centers whose main role is to be the 
trusted third party to determine the linkage function manually and link data for 
research via a master population list for a designated region. Recently, a more 
flexible computerized third-party linkage platform, Secure Decoupled Linkage 
(SDLink), has been proposed based on: (1) decoupling data via encryption, (2) 
obfuscation via chaffing (adding fake data) and universe manipulation; and (3) 
minimum information disclosure via recoding.
RESULTS: We synthesize this literature to formalize a new framework for privacy 
preserving interactive record linkage (PPIRL) with tractable privacy and utility 
properties and then analyze the literature using this framework.
CONCLUSIONS: Human-based third-party linkage centers for privacy preserving 
record linkage are the accepted norm internationally. We find that a 
computer-based third-party platform that can precisely control the information 
disclosed at the micro level and allow frequent human interaction during the 
linkage process, is an effective human-machine hybrid system that significantly 
improves on the linkage center model both in terms of privacy and utility.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002165
PMCID: PMC3932473
PMID: 24201028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]