546. JMIR Med Inform. 2017 Dec 8;5(4):e51. doi: 10.2196/medinform.9170.

Adverse Drug Event Discovery Using Biomedical Literature: A Big Data Neural 
Network Adventure.

P Tafti A(1), Badger J(1), LaRose E(1), Shirzadi E(2), Mahnke A(1), Mayer J(1), 
Ye Z(1), Page D(3), Peissig P(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Research Center, Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, 
Marshfield, WI, United States.
(2)Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.

BACKGROUND: The study of adverse drug events (ADEs) is a tenured topic in 
medical literature. In recent years, increasing numbers of scientific articles 
and health-related social media posts have been generated and shared daily, 
albeit with very limited use for ADE study and with little known about the 
content with respect to ADEs.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop a big data analytics strategy 
that mines the content of scientific articles and health-related Web-based 
social media to detect and identify ADEs.
METHODS: We analyzed the following two data sources: (1) biomedical articles and 
(2) health-related social media blog posts. We developed an intelligent and 
scalable text mining solution on big data infrastructures composed of Apache 
Spark, natural language processing, and machine learning. This was combined with 
an Elasticsearch No-SQL distributed database to explore and visualize ADEs.
RESULTS: The accuracy, precision, recall, and area under receiver operating 
characteristic of the system were 92.7%, 93.6%, 93.0%, and 0.905, respectively, 
and showed better results in comparison with traditional approaches in the 
literature. This work not only detected and classified ADE sentences from big 
data biomedical literature but also scientifically visualized ADE interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to investigate 
a big data machine learning strategy for ADE discovery on massive datasets 
downloaded from PubMed Central and social media. This contribution illustrates 
possible capacities in big data biomedical text analysis using advanced 
computational methods with real-time update from new data published on a daily 
basis.

©Ahmad P Tafti, Jonathan Badger, Eric LaRose, Ehsan Shirzadi, Andrea Mahnke, 
John Mayer, Zhan Ye, David Page, Peggy Peissig. Originally published in JMIR 
Medical Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 08.12.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.9170
PMCID: PMC5741828
PMID: 29222076

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.