251. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Mar;91:103119. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103119. Epub 2019 
Feb 7.

ADEpedia-on-OHDSI: A next generation pharmacovigilance signal detection platform 
using the OHDSI common data model.

Yu Y(1), Ruddy KJ(2), Hong N(1), Tsuji S(1), Wen A(1), Shah ND(3), Jiang G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; 
Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the Science of Health Care Delivery, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
Electronic address: Jiang.Guoqian@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Supplementing the Spontaneous Reporting System (SRS) with Electronic 
Health Record (EHR) data for adverse drug reaction detection could augment 
sample size, increase population heterogeneity and cross-validate results for 
pharmacovigilance research. The difference in the underlying data structures and 
terminologies between SRS and EHR data presents challenges when attempting to 
integrate the two into a single database. The Observational Health Data Sciences 
and Informatics (OHDSI) collaboration provides a Common Data Model (CDM) for 
organizing and standardizing EHR data to support large-scale observational 
studies. The objective of the study is to develop and evaluate an informatics 
platform known as ADEpedia-on-OHDSI, where spontaneous reporting data from FDA's 
Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) is converted into the OHDSI CDM format 
towards building a next generation pharmacovigilance signal detection platform.
METHODS: An extraction, transformation and loading (ETL) tool was designed, 
developed, and implemented to convert FAERS data into the OHDSI CDM format. A 
comprehensive evaluation, including overall ETL evaluation, mapping quality 
evaluation of drug names to RxNorm, and an evaluation of transformation and 
imputation quality, was then performed to assess the mapping accuracy and 
information loss using the FAERS data collected between 2012 and 2017. 
Previously published findings related to vascular safety profile of triptans 
were validated using ADEpedia-on-OHDSI in pharmacovigilance research. For the 
triptan-related vascular event detection, signals were detected by Reporting 
Odds Ratio (ROR) in high-level group terms (HLGT) level, high-level terms (HLT) 
level and preferred term (PT) level using the original FAERS data and CDM-based 
FAERS respectively. In addition, six standardized MedDRA queries (SMQs) related 
to vascular events were applied.
RESULTS: A total of 4,619,362 adverse event cases were loaded into 8 tables in 
the OHDSI CDM. For drug name mapping, 93.9% records and 47.0% unique names were 
matched with RxNorm codes. Mapping accuracy of drug names was 96% based on a 
manual verification of randomly sampled 500 unique mappings. Information loss 
evaluation showed that more than 93% of the data is loaded into the OHDSI CDM 
for most fields, with the exception of drug route data (66%). The replication 
study detected 5, 18, 47 and 6, 18, 50 triptan-related vascular event signals in 
MedDRA HLGT level, HLT level, and PT level for the original FAERS data and 
CDM-based FAERS respectively. The signal detection scores of six standardized 
MedDRA queries (SMQs) of vascular events in the raw data study were found to be 
lower than those scores in the CDM study.
CONCLUSION: The outcome of this work would facilitate seamless integration and 
combined analyses of both SRS and EHR data for pharmacovigilance in 
ADEpedia-on-OHDSI, our platform for next generation pharmacovigilance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103119
PMCID: PMC6432939
PMID: 30738946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]