508. J Biomed Inform. 2011 Dec;44 Suppl 1:S94-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.07.007. 
Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Integrating clinical research with the Healthcare Enterprise: from the RE-USE 
project to the EHR4CR platform.

El Fadly A(1), Rance B, Lucas N, Mead C, Chatellier G, Lastic PY, Jaulent MC, 
Daniel C.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, UMR_S 872 eq20, 15 rue de l'école de médecine, 75006 Paris, France. 
nelfadly@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: There are different approaches for repurposing clinical data 
collected in the Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR) for use in clinical 
research. Semantic integration of "siloed" applications across domain boundaries 
is the raison d'être of the standards-based profiles developed by the 
Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) initiative - an initiative by 
healthcare professionals and industry promoting the coordinated use of 
established standards such as DICOM and HL7 to address specific clinical needs 
in support of optimal patient care. In particular, the combination of two IHE 
profiles - the integration profile "Retrieve Form for Data Capture" (RFD), and 
the IHE content profile "Clinical Research Document" (CRD) - offers a 
straightforward approach to repurposing EHR data by enabling the pre-population 
of the case report forms (eCRF) used for clinical research data capture by 
Clinical Data Management Systems (CDMS) with previously collected EHR data.
OBJECTIVE: Implement an alternative solution of the RFD-CRD integration profile 
centered around two approaches: (i) Use of the EHR as the single-source 
data-entry and persistence point in order to ensure that all the clinical data 
for a given patient could be found in a single source irrespective of the data 
collection context, i.e. patient care or clinical research; and (ii) Maximize 
the automatic pre-population process through the use of a semantic 
interoperability services that identify duplicate or semantically-equivalent 
eCRF/EHR data elements as they were collected in the EHR context.
METHODS: The RE-USE architecture and associated profiles are focused on defining 
a set of scalable, standards-based, IHE-compliant profiles that can enable 
single-source data collection/entry and cross-system data reuse through semantic 
integration. Specifically, data reuse is realized through the semantic mapping 
of data collection fields in electronic Case Report Forms (eCRFs) to data 
elements previously defined as part of patient care-centric templates in the EHR 
context. The approach was evaluated in the context of a multi-center clinical 
trial conducted in a large, multi-disciplinary hospital with an installed EHR.
RESULTS: Data elements of seven eCRFs used in a multi-center clinical trial were 
mapped to data elements of patient care-centric templates in use in the EHR at 
the George Pompidou hospital. 13.4% of the data elements of the eCRFs were found 
to be represented in EHR templates and were therefore candidate for 
pre-population. During the execution phase of the clinical study, the semantic 
mapping architecture enabled data persisted in the EHR context as part of 
clinical care to be used to pre-populate eCRFS for use without secondary data 
entry. To ensure that the pre-populated data is viable for use in the clinical 
research context, all pre-populated eCRF data needs to be first approved by a 
trial investigator prior to being persisted in a research data store within a 
CDMS.
CONCLUSION: Single-source data entry in the clinical care context for use in the 
clinical research context - a process enabled through the use of the EHR as 
single point of data entry, can - if demonstrated to be a viable strategy - not 
only significantly reduce data collection efforts while simultaneously 
increasing data collection accuracy secondary to elimination of transcription or 
double-entry errors between the two contexts but also ensure that all the 
clinical data for a given patient, irrespective of the data collection context, 
are available in the EHR for decision support and treatment planning. The RE-USE 
approach used mapping algorithms to identify semantic coherence between clinical 
care and clinical research data elements and pre-populate eCRFs. The RE-USE 
project utilized SNOMED International v.3.5 as its "pivot reference terminology" 
to support EHR-to-eCRF mapping, a decision that likely enhanced the "recall" of 
the mapping algorithms. The RE-USE results demonstrate the difficult challenges 
involved in semantic integration between the clinical care and clinical research 
contexts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.07.007
PMID: 21888989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]