209. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2008:616-27.

Filling the gaps between tools and users: a tool comparator, using 
protein-protein interaction as an example.

Kano Y(1), Nguyen N, Saetre R, Yoshida K, Miyao Y, Tsuruoka Y, Matsubayashi Y, 
Ananiadou S, Tsujii J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Tokyo.

Recently, several text mining programs have reached a near-practical level of 
performance. Some systems are already being used by biologists and database 
curators. However, it has also been recognized that current Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) and Text Mining (TM) technology is not easy to deploy, since 
research groups tend to develop systems that cater specifically to their own 
requirements. One of the major reasons for the difficulty of deployment of 
NLP/TM technology is that re-usability and interoperability of software tools 
are typically not considered during development. While some effort has been 
invested in making interoperable NLP/TM toolkits, the developers of end-to-end 
systems still often struggle to reuse NLP/TM tools, and often opt to develop 
similar programs from scratch instead. This is particularly the case in BioNLP, 
since the requirements of biologists are so diverse that NLP tools have to be 
adapted and re-organized in a much more extensive manner than was originally 
expected. Although generic frameworks like UIMA (Unstructured Information 
Management Architecture) provide promising ways to solve this problem, the 
solution that they provide is only partial. In order for truly interoperable 
toolkits to become a reality, we also need sharable type systems and a 
developer-friendly environment for software integration that includes 
functionality for systematic comparisons of available tools, a simple I/O 
interface, and visualization tools. In this paper, we describe such an 
environment that was developed based on UIMA, and we show its feasibility 
through our experience in developing a protein-protein interaction (PPI) 
extraction system.

PMID: 18229720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]