561. Using nationwide ‘big data’ from linked electronic health records to help 
improve outcomes in cardiovascular diseases: 33 studies using methods from 
epidemiology, informatics, economics and social science in the ClinicAl disease 
research using LInked Bespoke studies and Electronic health Records (CALIBER) 
programme.

Hemingway H(1)(2), Feder GS(3), Fitzpatrick NK(1)(2), Denaxas S(1)(2), Shah 
AD(1)(2), Timmis AD(2)(4)(5).

Southampton (UK): NIHR Journals Library; 2017 Jan.
Programme Grants for Applied Research.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, UK
(2)Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, University College London, 
London, UK
(3)Centre for Academic Primary Care, School of Social and Community Medicine, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
(4)Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK
(5)Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, Queen Mary University of 
London, London, UK

BACKGROUND: Electronic health records (EHRs), when linked across primary and 
secondary care and curated for research use, have the potential to improve our 
understanding of care quality and outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate new opportunities arising from linked EHRs for improving 
quality of care and outcomes for patients at risk of or with coronary disease 
across the patient journey.
DESIGN: Epidemiological cohort, health informatics, health economics and 
ethnographic approaches were used.
SETTING: 230 NHS hospitals and 226 general practices in England and Wales.
PARTICIPANTS: Up to 2 million initially healthy adults, 100,000 people with 
stable coronary artery disease (SCAD) and up to 300,000 patients with acute 
coronary syndrome.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Quality of care, fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) events.
DATA PLATFORM AND METHODS: We created a novel research platform [ClinicAl 
disease research using LInked Bespoke studies and Electronic health Records 
(CALIBER)] based on linkage of four major sources of EHR data in primary care 
and national registries. We carried out 33 complementary studies within the 
CALIBER framework. We developed a web-based clinical decision support system 
(CDSS) in hospital chest pain clinics. We established a novel consented 
prognostic clinical cohort of SCAD patients.
RESULTS: CALIBER was successfully established as a valid research platform based 
on linked EHR data in nearly 2 million adults with > 600 EHR phenotypes 
implemented on the web portal (see https://caliberresearch.org/portal). Despite 
national guidance, key opportunities for investigation and treatment were missed 
across the patient journey, resulting in a worse prognosis for patients in the 
UK compared with patients in health systems in other countries. Our novel, 
contemporary, high-resolution studies showed heterogeneous associations for CVD 
risk factors across CVDs. The CDSS did not alter the decision-making behaviour 
of clinicians in chest pain clinics. Prognostic models using real-world data 
validly discriminated risk of death and events, and were used in 
cost-effectiveness decision models.
CONCLUSIONS: Emerging ‘big data’ opportunities arising from the linkage of 
records at different stages of a patient’s journey are vital to the generation 
of actionable insights into the diagnosis, risk stratification and 
cost-effective treatment of people at risk of, or with, CVD.
FUTURE WORK: The vast majority of NHS data remain inaccessible to research and 
this hampers efforts to improve efficiency and quality of care and to drive 
innovation. We propose three priority directions for further research. First, 
there is an urgent need to ‘unlock’ more detailed data within hospitals for the 
scale of the UK’s 65 million population. Second, there is a need for scaled 
approaches to using EHRs to design and carry out trials, and interpret the 
implementation of trial results. Third, large-scale, disease agnostic genetic 
and biological collections linked to such EHRs are required in order to deliver 
precision medicine and to innovate discovery.
STUDY REGISTRATION: CALIBER studies are registered as follows: study 2 – 
NCT01569139, study 4 – NCT02176174 and NCT01164371, study 5 – NCT01163513, 
studies 6 and 7 – NCT01804439, study 8 – NCT02285322, and studies 26–29 – 
NCT01162187. Optimising the Management of Angina is registered as Current 
Controlled Trials ISRCTN54381840.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Programme Grants for 
Applied Research programme (RP-PG-0407-10314) (all 33 studies) and additional 
funding from the Wellcome Trust (study 1), Medical Research Council Partnership 
grant (study 3), Servier (study 16), NIHR Research Methods Fellowship funding 
(study 19) and NIHR Research for Patient Benefit (study 33).

The CALIBER programme linked four sources of electronic health record data to 
create a research platform and used that to identify ways of improving care for 
people at risk of, or with, cardiovascular diseases.

Copyright © Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced 
by Hemingway et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the 
Secretary of State for Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the 
purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) 
may be included in professional journals provided that suitable acknowledgement 
is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. 
Applications for commercial reproduction should be addressed to: NIHR Journals 
Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies 
Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science Park, 
Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.

DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05040
PMID: 28151614