232. Appl Clin Inform. 2015 Aug 5;6(3):488-505. doi: 10.4338/ACI-2014-12-RA-0115. 
eCollection 2015.

A Standards-Based Architecture Proposal for Integrating Patient mHealth Apps to 
Electronic Health Record Systems.

Marceglia S(1), Fontelo P(2), Rossi E(3), Ackerman MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, U.S. National 
Library of Medicine , Bethesda, MD 20994, USA ; Clinical Center for 
Neurostimulation , Neurotechnology, and Movement DisordersFondazione IRCCS 
Ca'Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, U.S. National 
Library of Medicine , Bethesda, MD 20994, USA.
(3)eHealthLAB, Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria , 
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mobile health Applications (mHealth Apps) are opening the way to 
patients' responsible and active involvement with their own healthcare 
management. However, apart from Apps allowing patient's access to their 
electronic health records (EHRs), mHealth Apps are currently developed as 
dedicated "island systems".
OBJECTIVE: Although much work has been done on patient's access to EHRs, 
transfer of information from mHealth Apps to EHR systems is still low. This 
study proposes a standards-based architecture that can be adopted by mHealth 
Apps to exchange information with EHRs to support better quality of care.
METHODS: Following the definition of requirements for the EHR/mHealth App 
information exchange recently proposed, and after reviewing current standards, 
we designed the architecture for EHR/mHealth App integration. Then, as a case 
study, we modeled a system based on the proposed architecture aimed to support 
home monitoring for congestive heart failure patients. We simulated such process 
using, on the EHR side, OpenMRS, an open source longitudinal EHR and, on the 
mHealth App side, the iOS platform.
RESULTS: The integration architecture was based on the bi-directional exchange 
of standard documents (clinical document architecture rel2 - CDA2). In the 
process, the clinician "prescribes" the home monitoring procedures by creating a 
CDA2 prescription in the EHR that is sent, encrypted and de-identified, to the 
mHealth App to create the monitoring calendar. At the scheduled time, the App 
alerts the patient to start the monitoring. After the measurements are done, the 
App generates a structured CDA2-compliant monitoring report and sends it to the 
EHR, thus avoiding local storage.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed architecture, even if validated only in a simulation 
environment, represents a step forward in the integration of personal mHealth 
Apps into the larger health-IT ecosystem, allowing the bi-directional data 
exchange between patients and healthcare professionals, supporting the patient's 
engagement in self-management and self-care.

DOI: 10.4338/ACI-2014-12-RA-0115
PMCID: PMC4586338
PMID: 26448794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]