273. JMIR Med Inform. 2019 Nov 26;7(4):e14502. doi: 10.2196/14502.

Using a Large Margin Context-Aware Convolutional Neural Network to Automatically 
Extract Disease-Disease Association from Literature: Comparative Analytic Study.

Lai PT(1), Lu WL(2), Kuo TR(2), Chung CR(2), Han JC(2), Tsai RT(#)(2), Horng 
JT(#)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Province of China Taiwan.
(2)Department of Computer Science & Information Engineering, National Central 
University, Taoyuan, Province of China Taiwan.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University, 
Taichung, Province of China Taiwan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Research on disease-disease association (DDA), like comorbidity and 
complication, provides important insights into disease treatment and drug 
discovery, and a large body of the literature has been published in the field. 
However, using current search tools, it is not easy for researchers to retrieve 
information on the latest DDA findings. First, comorbidity and complication 
keywords pull up large numbers of PubMed studies. Second, disease is not 
highlighted in search results. Finally, DDA is not identified, as currently no 
disease-disease association extraction (DDAE) dataset or tools are available.
OBJECTIVE: As there are no available DDAE datasets or tools, this study aimed to 
develop (1) a DDAE dataset and (2) a neural network model for extracting DDA 
from the literature.
METHODS: In this study, we formulated DDAE as a supervised machine learning 
classification problem. To develop the system, we first built a DDAE dataset. We 
then employed two machine learning models, support vector machine and 
convolutional neural network, to extract DDA. Furthermore, we evaluated the 
effect of using the output layer as features of the support vector machine-based 
model. Finally, we implemented large margin context-aware convolutional neural 
network architecture to integrate context features and convolutional neural 
networks through the large margin function.
RESULTS: Our DDAE dataset consisted of 521 PubMed abstracts. Experiment results 
showed that the support vector machine-based approach achieved an F1 measure of 
80.32%, which is higher than the convolutional neural network-based approach 
(73.32%). Using the output layer of convolutional neural network as a feature 
for the support vector machine does not further improve the performance of 
support vector machine. However, our large margin context-aware-convolutional 
neural network achieved the highest F1 measure of 84.18% and demonstrated that 
combining the hinge loss function of support vector machine with a convolutional 
neural network into a single neural network architecture outperforms other 
approaches.
CONCLUSIONS: To facilitate the development of text-mining research for DDAE, we 
developed the first publicly available DDAE dataset consisting of disease 
mentions, Medical Subject Heading IDs, and relation annotations. We developed 
different conventional machine learning models and neural network architectures 
and evaluated their effects on our DDAE dataset. To further improve DDAE 
performance, we propose an large margin context-aware-convolutional neural 
network model for DDAE that outperforms other approaches.

©Po-Ting Lai, Wei-Liang Lu, Ting-Rung Kuo, Chia-Ru Chung, Jen-Chieh Han, Richard 
Tzong-Han Tsai, Jorng-Tzong Horng. Originally published in JMIR Medical 
Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 26.11.2019.

DOI: 10.2196/14502
PMCID: PMC6913619
PMID: 31769759

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.