138. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2008 Oct 14;8:58. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-8-58.

TCMGeneDIT: a database for associated traditional Chinese medicine, gene and 
disease information using text mining.

Fang YC(1), Huang HC, Chen HH, Juan HF.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. yukijuan@ntu.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), a complementary and alternative 
medical system in Western countries, has been used to treat various diseases 
over thousands of years in East Asian countries. In recent years, many herbal 
medicines were found to exhibit a variety of effects through regulating a wide 
range of gene expressions or protein activities. As available TCM data continue 
to accumulate rapidly, an urgent need for exploring these resources 
systematically is imperative, so as to effectively utilize the large volume of 
literature.
METHODS: TCM, gene, disease, biological pathway and protein-protein interaction 
information were collected from public databases. For association discovery, the 
TCM names, gene names, disease names, TCM ingredients and effects were used to 
annotate the literature corpus obtained from PubMed. The concept to mine entity 
associations was based on hypothesis testing and collocation analysis. The 
annotated corpus was processed with natural language processing tools and 
rule-based approaches were applied to the sentences for extracting the relations 
between TCM effectors and effects.
RESULTS: We developed a database, TCMGeneDIT, to provide association information 
about TCMs, genes, diseases, TCM effects and TCM ingredients mined from vast 
amount of biomedical literature. Integrated protein-protein interaction and 
biological pathways information are also available for exploring the regulations 
of genes associated with TCM curative effects. In addition, the transitive 
relationships among genes, TCMs and diseases could be inferred through the 
shared intermediates. Furthermore, TCMGeneDIT is useful in understanding the 
possible therapeutic mechanisms of TCMs via gene regulations and deducing 
synergistic or antagonistic contributions of the prescription components to the 
overall therapeutic effects. The database is now available at 
http://tcm.lifescience.ntu.edu.tw/.
CONCLUSION: TCMGeneDIT is a unique database that offers diverse association 
information on TCMs. This database integrates TCMs with biomedical studies that 
would facilitate clinical research and elucidate the possible therapeutic 
mechanisms of TCMs and gene regulations.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-8-58
PMCID: PMC2584015
PMID: 18854039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]