153. Methods Inf Med. 2015;54(3):276-82. doi: 10.3414/ME13-01-0133. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Secure Secondary Use of Clinical Data with Cloud-based NLP Services. Towards a 
Highly Scalable Research Infrastructure.

Christoph J, Griebel L, Leb I, Engel I, Köpcke F, Toddenroth D, Prokosch HU, 
Laufer J, Marquardt K, Sedlmayr M(1).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Martin Sedlmayr, Lehrstuhl für Medizinische Informatik, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Wetterkreuz 13, 91058 
Erlangen, Germany, E-mail: martin.sedlmayr@fau.de.

OBJECTIVES: The secondary use of clinical data provides large opportunities for 
clinical and translational research as well as quality assurance projects. For 
such purposes, it is necessary to provide a flexible and scalable infrastructure 
that is compliant with privacy requirements. The major goals of the cloud4health 
project are to define such an architecture, to implement a technical prototype 
that fulfills these requirements and to evaluate it with three use cases.
METHODS: The architecture provides components for multiple data provider sites 
such as hospitals to extract free text as well as structured data from local 
sources and de-identify such data for further anonymous or pseudonymous 
processing. Free text documentation is analyzed and transformed into structured 
information by text-mining services, which are provided within a cloud-computing 
environment. Thus, newly gained annotations can be integrated along with the 
already available structured data items and the resulting data sets can be 
uploaded to a central study portal for further analysis.
RESULTS: Based on the architecture design, a prototype has been implemented and 
is under evaluation in three clinical use cases. Data from several hundred 
patients provided by a University Hospital and a private hospital chain have 
already been processed.
CONCLUSIONS: Cloud4health has shown how existing components for secondary use of 
structured data can be complemented with text-mining in a privacy compliant 
manner. The cloud-computing paradigm allows a flexible and dynamically adaptable 
service provision that facilitates the adoption of services by data providers 
without own investments in respective hardware resources and software tools.

DOI: 10.3414/ME13-01-0133
PMID: 25377309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]