450. Int J Med Inform. 2006 Mar-Apr;75(3-4):185-90. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.07.017. Epub 2005 Aug 19.

Advanced and secure architectural EHR approaches.

Blobel B(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair of the EFMI WG Electronic Health Records, University Hospital 
Magdeburg, Germany. bernd.blobel@iis.fraunhofer.de

OBJECTIVES: Electronic Health Records (EHRs) provided as a lifelong patient 
record advance towards core applications of distributed and co-operating health 
information systems and health networks. For meeting the challenge of scalable, 
flexible, portable, secure EHR systems, the underlying EHR architecture must be 
based on the component paradigm and model driven, separating 
platform-independent and platform-specific models.
METHODS: Allowing manageable models, real systems must be decomposed and 
simplified. The resulting modelling approach has to follow the ISO Reference 
Model - Open Distributing Processing (RM-ODP). The ISO RM-ODP describes any 
system component from different perspectives. Platform-independent perspectives 
contain the enterprise view (business process, policies, scenarios, use cases), 
the information view (classes and associations) and the computational view 
(composition and decomposition), whereas platform-specific perspectives concern 
the engineering view (physical distribution and realisation) and the technology 
view (implementation details from protocols up to education and training) on 
system components. Those views have to be established for components reflecting 
aspects of all domains involved in healthcare environments including 
administrative, legal, medical, technical, etc. Thus, security-related component 
models reflecting all view mentioned have to be established for enabling both 
application and communication security services as integral part of the system's 
architecture. Beside decomposition and simplification of system regarding the 
different viewpoint on their components, different levels of systems' 
granularity can be defined hiding internals or focusing on properties of basic 
components to form a more complex structure. The resulting models describe both 
structure and behaviour of component-based systems.
RESULTS: The described approach has been deployed in different projects defining 
EHR systems and their underlying architectural principles. In that context, the 
Australian GEHR project, the openEHR initiative, the revision of CEN ENV 13606 
"Electronic Health Record communication", all based on Archetypes, but also the 
HL7 version 3 activities are discussed in some detail. The latter include the 
HL7 RIM, the HL7 Development Framework, the HL7's clinical document architecture 
(CDA) as well as the set of models from use cases, activity diagrams, sequence 
diagrams up to Domain Information Models (DMIMs) and their building blocks 
Common Message Element Types (CMET) Constraining Models to their underlying 
concepts.
CONCLUSION: The future-proof EHR architecture as open, user-centric, 
user-friendly, flexible, scalable, portable core application in health 
information systems and health networks has to follow advanced architectural 
paradigms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.07.017
PMID: 16112891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]