344. Front Neuroanat. 2015 May 27;9:66. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00066. eCollection 
2015.

Automatic target validation based on neuroscientific literature mining for 
tractography.

Vasques X(1), Richardet R(2), Hill SL(2), Slater D(3), Chappelier JC(4), Pralong 
E(5), Bloch J(5), Draganski B(3), Cif L(6).

Author information:
(1)Blue Brain Project, Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland ; IBM Systems France ; Laboratoire de Recherche 
en Neurosciences Cliniques France.
(2)Blue Brain Project, Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Laboratoire de Recherche Neuroimagerie, Université de Lausanne Lausanne, 
Switzerland ; Département des Neurosciences Cliniques, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Vaudois, Université de Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)School of Computer and Communication Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)Département des Neurosciences Cliniques, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Vaudois, Université de Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Laboratoire de Recherche Neuroimagerie, Université de Lausanne Lausanne, 
Switzerland ; Département des Neurosciences Cliniques, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Vaudois, Université de Lausanne Lausanne, Switzerland ; 
Département de Neurochirurgie, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, Centre Hospitalier 
Régional Universitaire de Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1 Montpellier, 
France.

Target identification for tractography studies requires solid anatomical 
knowledge validated by an extensive literature review across species for each 
seed structure to be studied. Manual literature review to identify targets for a 
given seed region is tedious and potentially subjective. Therefore, 
complementary approaches would be useful. We propose to use text-mining models 
to automatically suggest potential targets from the neuroscientific literature, 
full-text articles and abstracts, so that they can be used for anatomical 
connection studies and more specifically for tractography. We applied 
text-mining models to three structures: two well-studied structures, since 
validated deep brain stimulation targets, the internal globus pallidus and the 
subthalamic nucleus and, the nucleus accumbens, an exploratory target for 
treating psychiatric disorders. We performed a systematic review of the 
literature to document the projections of the three selected structures and 
compared it with the targets proposed by text-mining models, both in rat and 
primate (including human). We ran probabilistic tractography on the nucleus 
accumbens and compared the output with the results of the text-mining models and 
literature review. Overall, text-mining the literature could find three times as 
many targets as two man-weeks of curation could. The overall efficiency of the 
text-mining against literature review in our study was 98% recall (at 36% 
precision), meaning that over all the targets for the three selected seeds, only 
one target has been missed by text-mining. We demonstrate that connectivity for 
a structure of interest can be extracted from a very large amount of 
publications and abstracts. We believe this tool will be useful in helping the 
neuroscience community to facilitate connectivity studies of particular brain 
regions. The text mining tools used for the study are part of the HBP 
Neuroinformatics Platform, publicly available at 
http://connectivity-brainer.rhcloud.com/.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00066
PMCID: PMC4445321
PMID: 26074781