380. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2011;168:57-64.

A student-centred electronic health record system for clinical education.

Elliott K(1), Judd T, McColl G.

Author information:
(1)Medical Education Unit, Melbourne Medical School, The University of 
Melbourne. kaelli@unimelb.edu.au

INTRODUCTION: Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems are an increasingly 
important feature of the national healthcare system [1]. However, little 
research has investigated the impact this will have on medical students' 
learning. As part of an innovative technology platform for a new masters level 
program in medicine, we are developing a student-centred EHR system for clinical 
education. A prototype was trialed with medical students over several weeks 
during 2010. This paper reports on the findings of the trial, which had the 
overall aim of assisting our understanding of how trainee doctors might use an 
EHR system for learning and communication in a clinical setting.
BACKGROUND: In primary care and hospital settings, EHR systems offer potential 
benefits to medical students' learning: Longitudinal tracking of clinical 
progress towards established learning objectives [2]; Capacity to search across 
a substantial body of records [3]; Integration with online medical databases 
[3]; Development of expertise in creating, accessing and managing high quality 
EHRs [4]. While concerns have been raised that EHR systems may alter the 
interaction between teachers and students [3], and may negatively influence 
physician-patient communication [6], there is general consensus that the EHR is 
changing the current practice environment and teaching practice needs to 
respond.
METHODS: Final year medical students on clinical placement at a large university 
teaching hospital were recruited for the trial. Following a four-week period of 
use, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 10 participants. 
Audio-recorded interviews were transcribed and data analysed for emerging 
themes. Study participants were also surveyed about the importance of EHR 
systems in general, their familiarity with them, and general perceptions of 
sharing patient records.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical students in this pilot study identified a number of 
educational, practical and administrative advantages that the student-centred 
EHR system offered over their existing ad-hoc procedures for recording patient 
encounters. Findings from this preliminary study point to the need to introduce 
and instruct students' on the use of EHR systems from their earliest clinical 
encounters, and to closely integrate learning activities based on the EHR system 
with established learning objectives. Further research is required to evaluate 
the impact of student-centred EHR systems on learning outcomes.

PMID: 21893912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]