432. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Nov 9;8:436. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-436.

An open source infrastructure for managing knowledge and finding potential 
collaborators in a domain-specific subset of PubMed, with an example from human 
genome epidemiology.

Yu W(1), Yesupriya A, Wulf A, Qu J, Khoury MJ, Gwinn M.

Author information:
(1)National Office of Public Health Genomics, Coordinating Center for Health 
Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
WYu@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: Identifying relevant research in an ever-growing body of published 
literature is becoming increasingly difficult. Establishing domain-specific 
knowledge bases may be a more effective and efficient way to manage and query 
information within specific biomedical fields. Adopting controlled vocabulary is 
a critical step toward data integration and interoperability in any information 
system. We present an open source infrastructure that provides a powerful 
capacity for managing and mining data within a domain-specific knowledge base. 
As a practical application of our infrastructure, we presented two applications 
- Literature Finder and Investigator Browser - as well as a tool set for 
automating the data curating process for the human genome published literature 
database. The design of this infrastructure makes the system potentially 
extensible to other data sources.
RESULTS: Information retrieval and usability tests demonstrated that the system 
had high rates of recall and precision, 90% and 93% respectively. The system was 
easy to learn, easy to use, reasonably speedy and effective.
CONCLUSION: The open source system infrastructure presented in this paper 
provides a novel approach to managing and querying information and knowledge 
from domain-specific PubMed data. Using the controlled vocabulary UMLS enhanced 
data integration and interoperability and the extensibility of the system. In 
addition, by using MVC-based design and Java as a platform-independent 
programming language, this system provides a potential infrastructure for any 
domain-specific knowledge base in the biomedical field.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-436
PMCID: PMC2248211
PMID: 17996092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]