365. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58:268-279. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.10.011. Epub 2015 
Oct 27.

A research framework for pharmacovigilance in health social media: 
Identification and evaluation of patient adverse drug event reports.

Liu X(1), Chen H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Management Information Systems, The University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, United States. Electronic address: xiaoliu@email.arizona.edu.
(2)Department of Management Information Systems, The University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, United States; Tsinghua National Laboratory for Info. Science and 
Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: 
hchen@eller.arizona.edu.

Social media offer insights of patients' medical problems such as drug side 
effects and treatment failures. Patient reports of adverse drug events from 
social media have great potential to improve current practice of 
pharmacovigilance. However, extracting patient adverse drug event reports from 
social media continues to be an important challenge for health informatics 
research. In this study, we develop a research framework with advanced natural 
language processing techniques for integrated and high-performance patient 
reported adverse drug event extraction. The framework consists of medical entity 
extraction for recognizing patient discussions of drug and events, adverse drug 
event extraction with shortest dependency path kernel based statistical learning 
method and semantic filtering with information from medical knowledge bases, and 
report source classification to tease out noise. To evaluate the proposed 
framework, a series of experiments were conducted on a test bed encompassing 
about postings from major diabetes and heart disease forums in the United 
States. The results reveal that each component of the framework significantly 
contributes to its overall effectiveness. Our framework significantly 
outperforms prior work.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.10.011
PMID: 26518315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]