590. Prev Chronic Dis. 2016 Dec 29;13:E178. doi: 10.5888/pcd13.160445.

Using Health Information Technology and Data to Improve Chronic Disease Outcomes 
in Federally Qualified Health Centers in Maryland.

Smith EA(1), Lapinski J(2), Lichty-Hess J(2), Pier K(3).

Author information:
(1)Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 201 W. Preston St, 
Baltimore, MD 21201. Email: erica.smith@maryland.gov.
(2)Mid-Atlantic Association of Community Health Centers, Lanham, Maryland.
(3)Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Baltimore, Maryland.

Federally Qualified Health Centers provide health care services to underserved 
communities and vulnerable populations. In Maryland, the burden of chronic 
disease is high among Federally Qualified Health Center patients. Electronic 
health records (EHRs) are becoming more widely used, and effective use of EHR 
data may improve chronic disease outcomes. This article describes the process of 
developing a data aggregation and analytics platform to support health centers 
in using population health data based on standardized clinical quality measures. 
This data warehouse, capable of aggregating EHR data across multiple health 
centers, provides opportunities for benchmarking and elicits a discussion of 
quality improvement, including identifying and sharing clinical best practices. 
Phase 1 of the project involved the strategic engagement of health center 
leadership and staff to get buy-in and to assess readiness. Phase 2 established 
the technological infrastructure and processes to support data warehouse 
implementation and began the process of information sharing and collaboration 
among 4 early adopters. Phase 3 will expand the project to additional health 
centers and continue quality improvement efforts. The health information 
technology marketplace is rapidly changing, and staying current will be a 
priority so that the data warehouse remains a useful quality improvement tool 
that continues to meet the demands of Maryland health centers. Ongoing efforts 
will also focus on ways to further add value to the system, such as 
incorporating new metrics to better inform health center decision making and 
allocation of resources. The data warehouse can inform and transform the quality 
of health care delivered to Maryland's most vulnerable populations, and future 
research should focus on the ability of health centers to translate this 
potential into actual improvements.

DOI: 10.5888/pcd13.160445
PMCID: PMC5201151
PMID: 28033091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]