70. J Med Syst. 2019 Sep 14;43(10):320. doi: 10.1007/s10916-019-1445-8.

A Systematic Review for Enabling of Develop a Blockchain Technology in 
Healthcare Application: Taxonomy, Substantially Analysis, Motivations, 
Challenges, Recommendations and Future Direction.

Hussien HM(1), Yasin SM(1), Udzir SNI(1), Zaidan AA(2), Zaidan BB(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, Universiti Putra 
Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Computing, Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris, Tanjong Malim, 
Malaysia.
(3)Department of Computing, Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris, Tanjong Malim, 
Malaysia. bilalbahaa@fskik.upsi.edu.my.

Blockchain in healthcare applications requires robust security and privacy 
mechanism for high-level authentication, interoperability and medical records 
sharing to comply with the strict legal requirements of the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Blockchain technology in the 
healthcare industry has received considerable research attention in recent 
years. This study conducts a review to substantially analyse and map the 
research landscape of current technologies, mainly the use of blockchain in 
healthcare applications, into a coherent taxonomy. The present study 
systematically searches all relevant research articles on blockchain in 
healthcare applications in three accessible databases, namely, ScienceDirect, 
IEEE and Web of Science, by using the defined keywords 'blockchain', 
'healthcare' and 'electronic health records' and their variations. The final set 
of collected articles related to the use of blockchain in healthcare application 
is divided into three categories. The first category includes articles (i.e. 
43/58 scientific articles) that attempted to develop and design healthcare 
applications integrating blockchain, particularly those on new architecture, 
system designs, framework, scheme, model, platform, approach, protocol and 
algorithm. The second category includes studies (i.e., 6/58 scientific articles) 
that attempted to evaluate and analyse the adoption of blockchain in the 
healthcare system. Finally, the third category comprises review and survey 
articles (i.e., 6/58 scientific articles) related to the integration of 
blockchain into healthcare applications. The final articles for review are 
discussed on the basis of five aspects: (1) year of publication, (2) nationality 
of authors, (3) publishing house or journal, (4) purpose of using blockchain in 
health applications and the corresponding contributions and (5) problem types 
and proposed solutions. Additionally, this study provides identified 
motivations, open challenges and recommendations on the use of blockchain in 
healthcare applications. The current research contributes to the literature by 
providing a detailed review of feasible alternatives and identifying the 
research gaps. Accordingly, researchers and developers are provided with 
appealing opportunities to further develop decentralised healthcare applications 
through a comprehensive discussion of about the importance of blockchain and its 
integration into various healthcare applications.

DOI: 10.1007/s10916-019-1445-8
PMID: 31522262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]