96. J Hosp Manag Health Policy. 2019 Sep;3:22. doi: 10.21037/jhmhp.2019.08.01. Epub 
2019 Sep 3.

A Health System's Pilot Experience with Using Social Knowledge Networking (SKN) 
Technology to Enable Meaningful Use of EHR Medication Reconciliation Technology.

Rangachari P(1), Dellsperger KC(2), Rethemeyer RK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Health Sciences College of Allied Health 
Sciences Augusta University, Augusta, GA.
(2)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta University, Augusta, GA.
(3)Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy, University at Albany, State 
University of New York (SUNY), Albany, NY.

Similar to issues faced in health systems across USA, AU Health, based in 
Augusta, Georgia, faced a scenario of low physician engagement in, and 
limited-use of its Electronic Health Record (EHR) Medication Reconciliation 
(MedRec) technology, which translated to high rates of medication discrepancies 
and low accuracy of the patient's active medication list, during transitions of 
care. In fall 2016, a two-year grant was secured from the U.S. Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), to pilot a Social Knowledge Networking 
(SKN) system pertaining to "EHR-MedRec," to enable AU Health to progress from 
"limited use" of EHR MedRec technology, to "meaningful use." The rationale 
behind an SKN system, is that it could provide a platform for inter-professional 
knowledge exchange on practice issues related to EHR MedRec, across diverse 
provider subgroups and care settings, to highlight adverse consequences of gaps 
in practice for patient safety, and emphasize the value of adhering to 
best-practices in EHR MedRec. This, in turn, is expected to increase provider 
engagement in addressing issues related to EHR MedRec, and promote 
inter-professional learning of best-practices, to create a foundation for 
practice change or improvement (e.g., Meaningful Use of EHR MedRec technology). 
This Case Report describes AU Health's experiences with this novel initiative to 
pilot an SKN system for enabling Meaningful Use of EHR MedRec technology. It 
also discusses lessons learned in regard to the potential of an SKN system to 
enable inter-professional learning and practice improvement in the context of 
EHR MedRec, which, in turn, helps identify strategies and practice implications 
for healthcare managers.

DOI: 10.21037/jhmhp.2019.08.01
PMCID: PMC6813792
PMID: 31656950

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None to declare.