521. Appl Clin Inform. 2018 Jul;9(3):541-552. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1666844. Epub 2018 
Jul 18.

Electronic Health Record Interactions through Voice: A Review.

Kumah-Crystal YA(1), Pirtle CJ(1), Whyte HM(2), Goode ES(2), Anders SH(1)(3), 
Lehmann CU(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University College of Arts and 
Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States.

BACKGROUND: Usability problems in the electronic health record (EHR) lead to 
workflow inefficiencies when navigating charts and entering or retrieving data 
using standard keyboard and mouse interfaces. Voice input technology has been 
used to overcome some of the challenges associated with conventional interfaces 
and continues to evolve as a promising way to interact with the EHR.
OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the literature and evidence on voice input 
technology used to facilitate work in the EHR. It also reviews the benefits and 
challenges of implementation and use of voice technologies, and discusses 
emerging opportunities with voice assistant technology.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review of the literature to identify articles 
that discuss the use of voice technology to facilitate health care work. We 
searched MEDLINE and the Google search engine to identify relevant articles. We 
evaluated articles that discussed the strengths and limitations of voice 
technology to facilitate health care work. Consumer articles from leading 
technology publications addressing emerging use of voice assistants were 
reviewed to ascertain functionalities in existing consumer applications.
RESULTS: Using a MEDLINE search, we identified 683 articles that were reviewed 
for inclusion eligibility. The references of included articles were also 
reviewed. Sixty-one papers that discussed the use of voice tools in health care 
were included, of which 32 detailed the use of voice technologies in production 
environments. Articles were organized into three domains: Voice for (1) 
documentation, (2) commands, and (3) interactive response and navigation for 
patients. Of 31 articles that discussed usability attributes of consumer voice 
assistant technology, 12 were included in the review.
CONCLUSION: We highlight the successes and challenges of voice input 
technologies in health care and discuss opportunities to incorporate emerging 
voice assistant technologies used in the consumer domain.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1666844
PMCID: PMC6051768
PMID: 30040113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author's institution has developed an 
in-kind relationship with Nuance Communications Inc., which provides their 
software platform for Vanderbilt researchers to develop voice assistance tools.