396. BMJ Open Qual. 2017 Oct 21;6(2):e000102. doi: 10.1136/bmjoq-2017-000102. 
eCollection 2017.

Improving best possible medication history with vulnerable patients at an urban 
safety net academic hospital using pharmacy technicians.

Sadasivaiah S(1), Smith DE(2), Goldman S(1), Ratanawongsa N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, Zuckerberg 
San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center, San Francisco, California, 
USA.
(2)Department of Public Health, Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and 
Trauma Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, UCSF Center for Vulnerable Populations at Zuckerberg 
San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Best possible medication history (BPMH) enhances the care of safety 
net patients, especially those with limited English proficiency and limited 
health literacy who are most vulnerable to medication error during the hospital 
admission process. Our large urban academic safety net centre faced numerous 
barriers to achieve BPMH among hospitalised patients including communication 
barriers that increase the time and complexity of eliciting BPMH, frequent 
provider turnover at our training institution and lack of an electronic health 
record (EHR) medication reconciliation tool to facilitate BPMH collection and 
monitoring.
DESIGN: Leveraging opportunities afforded by the US federal incentive EHR 
programme, our multidisciplinary team designed an EHR-facilitated medication 
reconciliation programme by which pharmacy technicians engaged newly admitted 
patients and their caregivers at the bedside to develop and electronically 
document the BPMH.
STRATEGY: Prior to this intervention, pharmacy technicians had no role in BPMH. 
Providers collected home medications documented on paper notes without a 
consistent methodology. With each plan-do-study-act (PDSA) cycle since the 
programme began, the goal was to increase the per cent of BPMH completed by a 
pharmacy technician. Individual PDSA cycles targeted either the pharmacy 
technicians by expanding their pool of eligible patients or provider engagement 
with the pharmacy technician workflow.
RESULTS: By optimising not only the health information technology platform but 
also the operational processes, the programme achieved a nearly 80% generation 
of BPMH completed by a highly trained pharmacy technician, surpassing its 
intended goal of 50% BPMH completion by a pharmacy technician on admission.
CONCLUSION: An EHR-facilitated tool improved BPMH at an urban academic safety 
net hospital using pharmacy technicians.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjoq-2017-000102
PMCID: PMC5699117
PMID: 29450283

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.