301. J Biomed Inform. 2017 Jul;71S:S68-S76. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.07.019. Epub 2016 
Aug 3.

A pilot study of a heuristic algorithm for novel template identification from VA 
electronic medical record text.

Redd AM(1), Gundlapalli AV(2), Divita G(3), Carter ME(4), Tran LT(3), Samore 
MH(5).

Author information:
(1)VA Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, United States; 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT, United States. Electronic address: andrew.redd@hsc.utah.edu.
(2)VA Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, United States; 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT, United States; Department of Biomedical Informatics, University 
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Electronic 
address: adi.gundlapalli@hsc.utah.edu.
(3)VA Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, United States; 
Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah School of Medicine, 
Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
(4)VA Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
(5)VA Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, United States; 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT, United States; Department of Biomedical Informatics, University 
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.

RATIONALE: Templates in text notes pose challenges for automated information 
extraction algorithms. We propose a method that identifies novel templates in 
plain text medical notes. The identification can then be used to either include 
or exclude templates when processing notes for information extraction.
METHODS: The two-module method is based on the framework of information foraging 
and addresses the hypothesis that documents containing templates and the 
templates within those documents can be identified by common features. The first 
module takes documents from the corpus and groups those with common templates. 
This is accomplished through a binned word count hierarchical clustering 
algorithm. The second module extracts the templates. It uses the groupings and 
performs a longest common subsequence (LCS) algorithm to obtain the constituent 
parts of the templates. The method was developed and tested on a random document 
corpus of 750 notes derived from a large database of US Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) electronic medical notes.
RESULTS: The grouping module, using hierarchical clustering, identified 23 
groups with 3 documents or more, consisting of 120 documents from the 750 
documents in our test corpus. Of these, 18 groups had at least one common 
template that was present in all documents in the group for a positive 
predictive value of 78%. The LCS extraction module performed with 100% positive 
predictive value, 94% sensitivity, and 83% negative predictive value. The human 
review determined that in 4 groups the template covered the entire document, 
with the remaining 14 groups containing a common section template. Among 
documents with templates, the number of templates per document ranged from 1 to 
14. The mean and median number of templates per group was 5.9 and 5, 
respectively.
DISCUSSION: The grouping method was successful in finding like documents 
containing templates. Of the groups of documents containing templates, the LCS 
module was successful in deciphering text belonging to the template and text 
that was extraneous. Major obstacles to improved performance included documents 
composed of multiple templates, templates that included other templates embedded 
within them, and variants of templates. We demonstrate proof of concept of the 
grouping and extraction method of identifying templates in electronic medical 
records in this pilot study and propose methods to improve performance and 
scaling up.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.07.019
PMID: 27497780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]