73. BMC Med Genomics. 2019 Dec 30;12(1):200. doi: 10.1186/s12920-019-0647-8.

Genome analysis and knowledge-driven variant interpretation with TGex.

Dahary D(1), Golan Y(2), Mazor Y(2), Zelig O(2), Barshir R(3), Twik M(3), Iny 
Stein T(3), Rosner G(4)(5), Kariv R(4)(5), Chen F(6), Zhang Q(6), Shen 
Y(6)(7)(8), Safran M(3), Lancet D(9), Fishilevich S(10).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics, LifeMap Sciences Inc., Marshfield, MA, 02050, USA. 
dvird@lifemapsc.com.
(2)Clinical Genetics, LifeMap Sciences Inc., Marshfield, MA, 02050, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(6)Genetic and Metabolic Central Laboratory, Birth Defect Prevention Research 
Institute, Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Children's Hospital of Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, 530002, China.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Shanghai 
Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200127, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Division of Genetics and 
Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel. doron.lancet@weizmann.ac.il.
(10)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel. simon.fishilevich@weizmann.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: The clinical genetics revolution ushers in great opportunities, 
accompanied by significant challenges. The fundamental mission in clinical 
genetics is to analyze genomes, and to identify the most relevant genetic 
variations underlying a patient's phenotypes and symptoms. The adoption of Whole 
Genome Sequencing requires novel capacities for interpretation of non-coding 
variants.
RESULTS: We present TGex, the Translational Genomics expert, a novel genome 
variation analysis and interpretation platform, with remarkable exome analysis 
capacities and a pioneering approach of non-coding variants interpretation. 
TGex's main strength is combining state-of-the-art variant filtering with 
knowledge-driven analysis made possible by VarElect, our highly effective 
gene-phenotype interpretation tool. VarElect leverages the widely used GeneCards 
knowledgebase, which integrates information from > 150 automatically-mined data 
sources. Access to such a comprehensive data compendium also facilitates TGex's 
broad variant annotation, supporting evidence exploration, and decision making. 
TGex has an interactive, user-friendly, and easy adaptive interface, ACMG 
compliance, and an automated reporting system. Beyond comprehensive whole exome 
sequence capabilities, TGex encompasses innovative non-coding variants 
interpretation, towards the goal of maximal exploitation of whole genome 
sequence analyses in the clinical genetics practice. This is enabled by 
GeneCards' recently developed GeneHancer, a novel integrative and fully 
annotated database of human enhancers and promoters. Examining use-cases from a 
variety of TGex users world-wide, we demonstrate its high diagnostic yields (42% 
for single exome and 50% for trios in 1500 rare genetic disease cases) and 
critical actionable genetic findings. The platform's support for integration 
with EHR and LIMS through dedicated APIs facilitates automated retrieval of 
patient data for TGex's customizable reporting engine, establishing a rapid and 
cost-effective workflow for an entire range of clinical genetic testing, 
including rare disorders, cancer predisposition, tumor biopsies and health 
screening.
CONCLUSIONS: TGex is an innovative tool for the annotation, analysis and 
prioritization of coding and non-coding genomic variants. It provides access to 
an extensive knowledgebase of genomic annotations, with intuitive and flexible 
configuration options, allows quick adaptation, and addresses various workflow 
requirements. It thus simplifies and accelerates variant interpretation in 
clinical genetics workflows, with remarkable diagnostic yield, as exemplified in 
the described use cases. TGex is available at http://tgex.genecards.org/.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-019-0647-8
PMCID: PMC6937949
PMID: 31888639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YG and YM are CEO and Vice President 
respectively (and co-founders) of LifeMap Sciences Inc., California, USA (LMS), 
OZ is the senior software engineer and DD is the clinical genetics product 
manager at LMS. LMS holds an exclusive license from the Yeda Research and 
Development Company Ltd., the commercial arm of the Weizmann Institute of 
Science (WIS), to market GeneCards Suite products, which are derived from the 
research of DL’s group at WIS, which is supported, among others, by a grant from 
LMS. SF, MS, RB, MT, and TIS are members of DL’s group. All authors have no 
other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or 
entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject 
matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.