171. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2012 Apr 5;12:29. doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-12-29.

CDAPubMed: a browser extension to retrieve EHR-based biomedical literature.

Perez-Rey D(1), Jimenez-Castellanos A, Garcia-Remesal M, Crespo J, Maojo V.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Group, Facultad de Informática, Departamento de 
Inteligencia Artificial, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Campus de 
Montegancedo, s/n, 28660 Madrid, Spain. dperezdelrey@fi.upm.es

BACKGROUND: Over the last few decades, the ever-increasing output of scientific 
publications has led to new challenges to keep up to date with the literature. 
In the biomedical area, this growth has introduced new requirements for 
professionals, e.g., physicians, who have to locate the exact papers that they 
need for their clinical and research work amongst a huge number of publications. 
Against this backdrop, novel information retrieval methods are even more 
necessary. While web search engines are widespread in many areas, facilitating 
access to all kinds of information, additional tools are required to 
automatically link information retrieved from these engines to specific 
biomedical applications. In the case of clinical environments, this also means 
considering aspects such as patient data security and confidentiality or 
structured contents, e.g., electronic health records (EHRs). In this scenario, 
we have developed a new tool to facilitate query building to retrieve scientific 
literature related to EHRs.
RESULTS: We have developed CDAPubMed, an open-source web browser extension to 
integrate EHR features in biomedical literature retrieval approaches. Clinical 
users can use CDAPubMed to: (i) load patient clinical documents, i.e., EHRs 
based on the Health Level 7-Clinical Document Architecture Standard (HL7-CDA), 
(ii) identify relevant terms for scientific literature search in these 
documents, i.e., Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), automatically driven by the 
CDAPubMed configuration, which advanced users can optimize to adapt to each 
specific situation, and (iii) generate and launch literature search queries to a 
major search engine, i.e., PubMed, to retrieve citations related to the EHR 
under examination.
CONCLUSIONS: CDAPubMed is a platform-independent tool designed to facilitate 
literature searching using keywords contained in specific EHRs. CDAPubMed is 
visually integrated, as an extension of a widespread web browser, within the 
standard PubMed interface. It has been tested on a public dataset of HL7-CDA 
documents, returning significantly fewer citations since queries are focused on 
characteristics identified within the EHR. For instance, compared with more than 
200,000 citations retrieved by breast neoplasm, fewer than ten citations were 
retrieved when ten patient features were added using CDAPubMed. This is an open 
source tool that can be freely used for non-profit purposes and integrated with 
other existing systems.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-12-29
PMCID: PMC3366875
PMID: 22480327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]