532. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2020 Jan;4:1-9. doi: 10.1200/CCI.19.00120.

Standards-Based Clinical Decision Support Platform to Manage Patients Who Meet 
Guideline-Based Criteria for Genetic Evaluation of Familial Cancer.

Del Fiol G(1), Kohlmann W(2), Bradshaw RL(1), Weir CR(1), Flynn M(3), Hess 
R(3)(4), Schiffman JD(2)(5), Nanjo C(1), Kawamoto K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(2)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(4)Department of Population Health Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
UT.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.

PURPOSE: The ubiquitous adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) with family 
health history (FHH) data provides opportunities for tailoring cancer screening 
strategies to individuals. We aimed to enable a standards-based clinical 
decision support (CDS) platform for identifying and managing patients who meet 
guidelines for genetic evaluation of hereditary cancer.
METHODS: The CDS platform (www.opencds.org) was used to implement algorithms 
based on the 2018 National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for genetic 
evaluation of hereditary breast/ovarian and colorectal cancer. The platform was 
designed to be interfaced with different EHR systems via the Health Level Seven 
International Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources standard. The platform 
was integrated with the Epic EHR and evaluated in a pilot study at an academic 
health care system.
RESULTS: The CDS platform was executed against a target population of 143,012 
patients; 5,245 (3.7%) met criteria for genetic evaluation based on the FHH 
recorded in the EHR. In a clinical pilot study, genetic counselors attempted to 
reach out to 71 of the patients. Of those patients, 25 (35%) scheduled an 
appointment, 10 (14%) declined, 2 (3%) did not need genetic counseling, 7 (10%) 
said they would consider it in the future, and 27 (38%) were unreachable. To 
date, 13 (52%) of the scheduled patients completed visits, and 2 (15%) of those 
were found to have pathogenic variants in cancer predisposition genes.
CONCLUSION: A standards-based CDS platform integrated with EHR systems is a 
promising population-based approach to identify patients who are appropriate 
candidates for genetic evaluation of hereditary cancers.

DOI: 10.1200/CCI.19.00120
PMCID: PMC7000231
PMID: 31951474

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/cci/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments). WENDY KOHLMANN: Employment: BioFire Diagnostics (I) MICHAEL 
FLYNN: Research Funding: Hitachi RACHEL HESS: Consulting or Advisory Role: 
Astellas Pharma JOSHUA D. SCHIFFMAN: Employment: PEEL Therapeutics Leadership: 
PEEL Therapeutics Stock and Other Ownership Interests: ItRunsInMyFamily.com, 
PEEL Therapeutics Honoraria: Affymetrix Consulting or Advisory Role: N-of-One, 
Fabric Genomics CLAUDE NANJO: Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: 
We have internal (University of Utah) invention disclosures related to our work 
in health IT. These are primarily for copyright protection. We have no royalty 
arrangements at present or in the past 2 years. KENSAKU KAWAMOTO: Honoraria: 
Hitachi, Premier Consulting or Advisory Role: US Office of the National 
Coordinator for Health IT, via Security Risk Solutions and ESAC, McKesson 
InterQual, Klesis Healthcare Research Funding: Hitachi (Inst) Patents, 
Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: We have internal (University of Utah) 
invention disclosures related to our work in health IT. These are primarily for 
copyright protection. We have no royalty arrangements at present or in the past 
2 years. Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Hitachi Other Relationship: Nonprofit 
companies No other potential conflicts of interest were reported.