519. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Apr 11;9 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):S3. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-9-S3-S3.

Assessment of disease named entity recognition on a corpus of annotated 
sentences.

Jimeno A(1), Jimenez-Ruiz E, Lee V, Gaudan S, Berlanga R, Rebholz-Schuhmann D.

Author information:
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. yepes@ebi.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: In recent years, the recognition of semantic types from the 
biomedical scientific literature has been focused on named entities like protein 
and gene names (PGNs) and gene ontology terms (GO terms). Other semantic types 
like diseases have not received the same level of attention. Different solutions 
have been proposed to identify disease named entities in the scientific 
literature. While matching the terminology with language patterns suffers from 
low recall (e.g., Whatizit) other solutions make use of morpho-syntactic 
features to better cover the full scope of terminological variability (e.g., 
MetaMap). Currently, MetaMap that is provided from the National Library of 
Medicine (NLM) is the state of the art solution for the annotation of concepts 
from UMLS (Unified Medical Language System) in the literature. Nonetheless, its 
performance has not yet been assessed on an annotated corpus. In addition, 
little effort has been invested so far to generate an annotated dataset that 
links disease entities in text to disease entries in a database, thesaurus or 
ontology and that could serve as a gold standard to benchmark text mining 
solutions.
RESULTS: As part of our research work, we have taken a corpus that has been 
delivered in the past for the identification of associations of genes to 
diseases based on the UMLS Metathesaurus and we have reprocessed and 
re-annotated the corpus. We have gathered annotations for disease entities from 
two curators, analyzed their disagreement (0.51 in the kappa-statistic) and 
composed a single annotated corpus for public use. Thereafter, three solutions 
for disease named entity recognition including MetaMap have been applied to the 
corpus to automatically annotate it with UMLS Metathesaurus concepts. The 
resulting annotations have been benchmarked to compare their performance.
CONCLUSIONS: The annotated corpus is publicly available at 
ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/software/textmining/corpora/diseases and can serve as a 
benchmark to other systems. In addition, we found that dictionary look-up 
already provides competitive results indicating that the use of disease 
terminology is highly standardized throughout the terminologies and the 
literature. MetaMap generates precise results at the expense of insufficient 
recall while our statistical method obtains better recall at a lower precision 
rate. Even better results in terms of precision are achieved by combining at 
least two of the three methods leading, but this approach again lowers recall. 
Altogether, our analysis gives a better understanding of the complexity of 
disease annotations in the literature. MetaMap and the dictionary based approach 
are available through the Whatizit web service infrastructure (Rebholz-Schuhmann 
D, Arregui M, Gaudan S, Kirsch H, Jimeno A: Text processing through Web 
services: Calling Whatizit. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:296-298).

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S3-S3
PMCID: PMC2352871
PMID: 18426548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]