228. J Biomed Inform. 2018 Nov;87:68-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.10.001. Epub 2018 
Oct 4.

Social media mining for birth defects research: A rule-based, bootstrapping 
approach to collecting data for rare health-related events on Twitter.

Klein AZ(1), Sarker A(2), Cai H(3), Weissenbacher D(4), Gonzalez-Hernandez G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 
Electronic address: ariklein@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 
Electronic address: abeed@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 
Electronic address: hcai@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 
Electronic address: dweissen@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 
Electronic address: gragon@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Although birth defects are the leading cause of infant mortality in 
the United States, methods for observing human pregnancies with birth defect 
outcomes are limited.
OBJECTIVE: The primary objectives of this study were (i) to assess whether rare 
health-related events-in this case, birth defects-are reported on social media, 
(ii) to design and deploy a natural language processing (NLP) approach for 
collecting such sparse data from social media, and (iii) to utilize the 
collected data to discover a cohort of women whose pregnancies with birth defect 
outcomes could be observed on social media for epidemiological analysis.
METHODS: To assess whether birth defects are mentioned on social media, we mined 
432 million tweets posted by 112,647 users who were automatically identified via 
their public announcements of pregnancy on Twitter. To retrieve tweets that 
mention birth defects, we developed a rule-based, bootstrapping approach, which 
relies on a lexicon, lexical variants generated from the lexicon entries, 
regular expressions, post-processing, and manual analysis guided by 
distributional properties. To identify users whose pregnancies with birth defect 
outcomes could be observed for epidemiological analysis, inclusion criteria were 
(i) tweets indicating that the user's child has a birth defect, and (ii) 
accessibility to the user's tweets during pregnancy. We conducted a 
semi-automatic evaluation to estimate the recall of the tweet-collection 
approach, and performed a preliminary assessment of the prevalence of selected 
birth defects among the pregnancy cohort derived from Twitter.
RESULTS: We manually annotated 16,822 retrieved tweets, distinguishing tweets 
indicating that the user's child has a birth defect (true positives) from tweets 
that merely mention birth defects (false positives). Inter-annotator agreement 
was substantial: κ = 0.79 (Cohen's kappa). Analyzing the timelines of the 646 
users whose tweets were true positives resulted in the discovery of 195 users 
that met the inclusion criteria. Congenital heart defects are the most common 
type of birth defect reported on Twitter, consistent with findings in the 
general population. Based on an evaluation of 4169 tweets retrieved using 
alternative text mining methods, the recall of the tweet-collection approach was 
0.95.
CONCLUSIONS: Our contributions include (i) evidence that rare health-related 
events are indeed reported on Twitter, (ii) a generalizable, systematic NLP 
approach for collecting sparse tweets, (iii) a semi-automatic method to identify 
undetected tweets (false negatives), and (iv) a collection of publicly available 
tweets by pregnant users with birth defect outcomes, which could be used for 
future epidemiological analysis. In future work, the annotated tweets could be 
used to train machine learning algorithms to automatically identify users 
reporting birth defect outcomes, enabling the large-scale use of social media 
mining as a complementary method for such epidemiological research.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.10.001
PMCID: PMC6295660
PMID: 30292855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Interest None.