50. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 18;13(10):e0205855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205855. 
eCollection 2018.

Machine learning to support social media empowered patients in cancer care and 
cancer treatment decisions.

De Silva D(1), Ranasinghe W(1)(2), Bandaragoda T(1), Adikari A(1), Mills N(1), 
Iddamalgoda L(1), Alahakoon D(1), Lawrentschuk N(2), Persad R(3), Osipov E(4), 
Gray R(5), Bolton D(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Data Analytics and Cognition, La Trobe University, 
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.
(3)North Bristol, NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Electrical and Space Engineering, Luleå 
University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden.
(5)School of Nursing and Midwifery, La Trobe University, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: A primary variant of social media, online support groups (OSG) 
extend beyond the standard definition to incorporate a dimension of advice, 
support and guidance for patients. OSG are complementary, yet significant 
adjunct to patient journeys. Machine learning and natural language processing 
techniques can be applied to these large volumes of unstructured text 
discussions accumulated in OSG for intelligent extraction of patient-reported 
demographics, behaviours, decisions, treatment, side effects and expressions of 
emotions. New insights from the fusion and synthesis of such diverse 
patient-reported information, as expressed throughout the patient journey from 
diagnosis to treatment and recovery, can contribute towards informed 
decision-making on personalized healthcare delivery and the development of 
healthcare policy guidelines.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We have designed and developed an artificial intelligence 
based analytics framework using machine learning and natural language processing 
techniques for intelligent analysis and automated aggregation of patient 
information and interaction trajectories in online support groups. Alongside the 
social interactions aspect, patient behaviours, decisions, demographics, 
clinical factors, emotions, as subsequently expressed over time, are extracted 
and analysed. More specifically, we utilised this platform to investigate the 
impact of online social influences on the intimate decision scenario of 
selecting a treatment type, recovery after treatment, side effects and emotions 
expressed over time, using prostate cancer as a model. Results manifest the 
three major decision-making behaviours among patients, Paternalistic group, 
Autonomous group and Shared group. Furthermore, each group demonstrated diverse 
behaviours in post-decision discussions on clinical outcomes, advice and 
expressions of emotion during the twelve months following treatment. Over time, 
the transition of patients from information and emotional support seeking 
behaviours to providers of information and emotional support to other patients 
was also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study are a rigorous indication of the 
expectations of social media empowered patients, their potential for 
individualised decision-making, clinical and emotional needs. The increasing 
popularity of OSG further confirms that it is timely for clinicians to consider 
patient voices as expressed in OSG. We have successfully demonstrated that the 
proposed platform can be utilised to investigate, analyse and derive actionable 
insights from patient-reported information on prostate cancer, in support of 
patient focused healthcare delivery. The platform can be extended and applied 
just as effectively to any other medical condition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205855
PMCID: PMC6193663
PMID: 30335805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.