413. Healthc Inform Res. 2011 Jun;17(2):101-10. doi: 10.4258/hir.2011.17.2.101. Epub 
2011 Jun 30.

Development of an electronic claim system based on an integrated electronic 
health record platform to guarantee interoperability.

Kim HS(1), Cho H, Lee IK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Information Technology, Daegu Haany University, Daegu, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVES: We design and develop an electronic claim system based on an 
integrated electronic health record (EHR) platform. This system is designed to 
be used for ambulatory care by office-based physicians in the United States. 
This is achieved by integrating various medical standard technologies for 
interoperability between heterogeneous information systems.
METHODS: The developed system serves as a simple clinical data repository, it 
automatically fills out the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS)-1500 form based on information regarding the patients and physicians' 
clinical activities. It supports electronic insurance claims by creating 
reimbursement charges. It also contains an HL7 interface engine to exchange 
clinical messages between heterogeneous devices.
RESULTS: The system partially prevents physician malpractice by suggesting 
proper treatments according to patient diagnoses and supports physicians by 
easily preparing documents for reimbursement and submitting claim documents to 
insurance organizations electronically, without additional effort by the user. 
To show the usability of the developed system, we performed an experiment that 
compares the time spent filling out the CMS-1500 form directly and time required 
create electronic claim data using the developed system. From the experimental 
results, we conclude that the system could save considerable time for physicians 
in making claim documents.
CONCLUSIONS: The developed system might be particularly useful for those who 
need a reimbursement-specialized EHR system, even though the proposed system 
does not completely satisfy all criteria requested by the CMS and Office of the 
National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). This is because 
the criteria are not sufficient but necessary condition for the implementation 
of EHR systems. The system will be upgraded continuously to implement the 
criteria and to offer more stable and transparent transmission of electronic 
claim data.

DOI: 10.4258/hir.2011.17.2.101
PMCID: PMC3155167
PMID: 21886871