356. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2012;2012:532-41. Epub 2012 Nov 3.

Modeling and executing electronic health records driven phenotyping algorithms 
using the NQF Quality Data Model and JBoss® Drools Engine.

Li D(1), Endle CM, Murthy S, Stancl C, Suesse D, Sottara D, Huff SM, Chute CG, 
Pathak J.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

With increasing adoption of electronic health records (EHRs), the need for 
formal representations for EHR-driven phenotyping algorithms has been recognized 
for some time. The recently proposed Quality Data Model from the National 
Quality Forum (NQF) provides an information model and a grammar that is intended 
to represent data collected during routine clinical care in EHRs as well as the 
basic logic required to represent the algorithmic criteria for phenotype 
definitions. The QDM is further aligned with Meaningful Use standards to ensure 
that the clinical data and algorithmic criteria are represented in a consistent, 
unambiguous and reproducible manner. However, phenotype definitions represented 
in QDM, while structured, cannot be executed readily on existing EHRs. Rather, 
human interpretation, and subsequent implementation is a required step for this 
process. To address this need, the current study investigates open-source JBoss® 
Drools rules engine for automatic translation of QDM criteria into rules for 
execution over EHR data. In particular, using Apache Foundation's Unstructured 
Information Management Architecture (UIMA) platform, we developed a translator 
tool for converting QDM defined phenotyping algorithm criteria into executable 
Drools rules scripts, and demonstrated their execution on real patient data from 
Mayo Clinic to identify cases for Coronary Artery Disease and Diabetes. To the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first study illustrating a framework and an 
approach for executing phenotyping criteria modeled in QDM using the Drools 
business rules management system.

PMCID: PMC3540464
PMID: 23304325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]