34. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Feb;53:300-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.11.015. Epub 2014 
Dec 12.

Knowledge based word-concept model estimation and refinement for biomedical text 
mining.

Jimeno Yepes A(1), Berlanga R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
VIC 3010, Australia. Electronic address: antonio.jimeno@gmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Lenguages y Sistemas Informáticos, Universitat Jaume I, 
Castellón de la Plana, 12071, Spain.

Text mining of scientific literature has been essential for setting up large 
public biomedical databases, which are being widely used by the research 
community. In the biomedical domain, the existence of a large number of 
terminological resources and knowledge bases (KB) has enabled a myriad of 
machine learning methods for different text mining related tasks. Unfortunately, 
KBs have not been devised for text mining tasks but for human interpretation, 
thus performance of KB-based methods is usually lower when compared to 
supervised machine learning methods. The disadvantage of supervised methods 
though is they require labeled training data and therefore not useful for large 
scale biomedical text mining systems. KB-based methods do not have this 
limitation. In this paper, we describe a novel method to generate word-concept 
probabilities from a KB, which can serve as a basis for several text mining 
tasks. This method not only takes into account the underlying patterns within 
the descriptions contained in the KB but also those in texts available from 
large unlabeled corpora such as MEDLINE. The parameters of the model have been 
estimated without training data. Patterns from MEDLINE have been built using 
MetaMap for entity recognition and related using co-occurrences. The 
word-concept probabilities were evaluated on the task of word sense 
disambiguation (WSD). The results showed that our method obtained a higher 
degree of accuracy than other state-of-the-art approaches when evaluated on the 
MSH WSD data set. We also evaluated our method on the task of document ranking 
using MEDLINE citations. These results also showed an increase in performance 
over existing baseline retrieval approaches.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.11.015
PMID: 25510606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]