297. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008;9 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S1-S5.

Towards ontology-driven navigation of the lipid bibliosphere.

Baker CJ(1), Kanagasabai R, Ang WT, Veeramani A, Low HS, Wenk MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Mining, Institute for Infocomm Research, 21 Heng Mui Keng 
Terrace, Singapore 119613. cbaker@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

BACKGROUND: The indexing of scientific literature and content is a relevant and 
contemporary requirement within life science information systems. Navigating 
information available in legacy formats continues to be a challenge both in 
enterprise and academic domains. The emergence of semantic web technologies and 
their fusion with artificial intelligence techniques has provided a new toolkit 
with which to address these data integration challenges. In the emerging field 
of lipidomics such navigation challenges are barriers to the translation of 
scientific results into actionable knowledge, critical to the treatment of 
diseases such as Alzheimer's syndrome, Mycobacterium infections and cancer.
RESULTS: We present a literature-driven workflow involving document delivery and 
natural language processing steps generating tagged sentences containing lipid, 
protein and disease names, which are instantiated to custom designed lipid 
ontology. We describe the design challenges in capturing lipid nomenclature, the 
mandate of the ontology and its role as query model in the navigation of the 
lipid bibliosphere. We illustrate the extent of the description logic-based 
A-box query capability provided by the instantiated ontology using a graphical 
query composer to query sentences describing lipid-protein and lipid-disease 
correlations.
CONCLUSION: As scientists accept the need to readjust the manner in which we 
search for information and derive knowledge we illustrate a system that can 
constrain the literature explosion and knowledge navigation problems. 
Specifically we have focussed on solving this challenge for lipidomics 
researchers who have to deal with the lack of standardized vocabulary, differing 
classification schemes, and a wide array of synonyms before being able to derive 
scientific insights. The use of the OWL-DL variant of the Web Ontology Language 
(OWL) and description logic reasoning is pivotal in this regard, providing the 
lipid scientist with advanced query access to the results of text mining 
algorithms instantiated into the ontology. The visual query paradigm assists in 
the adoption of this technology.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-S1-S5
PMCID: PMC2259406
PMID: 18315858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]