626. J Public Health Dent. 2016 Mar;76(2):152-6. doi: 10.1111/jphd.12124. Epub 2015 
Oct 30.

Dental clinical research: an illustration of the value of standardized 
diagnostic terms.

Kalenderian E(1), Tokede B(1), Ramoni R(2), Khan M(1), Kimmes N(3), White 
J(4)(5), Vaderhobli R(4)(5), Yansane A(1), Feilzer A(6), Walji M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Health Policy and Epidemiology, Harvard School of Dental 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Center for Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology & Radiology, Oregon Health and Science University 
School of Dentistry, Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Science Center School of Dentistry at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Preventive and Restorative Dental Sciences, School of 
Dentistry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Material Science, Academic Centre of Dentistry Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Diagnostic and Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health, 
Houston, TX, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Secondary data are a significant resource for in-depth epidemiologic 
and public health research. It also allows for effective quality control and 
clinical outcomes measurement. To illustrate the value of structured diagnostic 
entry, a use case was developed to quantify adherence to current practice 
guidelines for managing chronic moderate periodontitis (CMP).
METHODS: Six dental schools using the same electronic health record (EHR) 
contribute data to a dental data repository (BigMouth) based on the i2b2 
data-warehousing platform. Participating institutions are able to query across 
the full repository without being able to back trace specific data to its 
originating institution. At each of the three sites whose data are included in 
this analysis, the Dental Diagnostic System (DDS) terminology was used to 
document diagnoses in the clinics. We ran multiple queries against this 
multi-institutional database, and the output was validated by manually reviewing 
a subset of patient charts.
RESULTS: Over the period under study, 1,866 patients were diagnosed with CMP. Of 
these, 15 percent received only periodontal prophylaxis treatment, 20 percent 
received only periodontal maintenance treatment, and only 41 percent received 
periodontal maintenance treatment in combination with other AAP guideline 
treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that most patients with CMP were not treated 
according to the AAP guidelines. On the basis of this use case, we conclude that 
the availability and habitual use of a structured diagnosis in an EHR allow for 
the aggregation and secondary analyses of clinical data to support downstream 
analyses for quality improvement and epidemiological assessments.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Public Health Dentistry published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Association of Public Health Dentistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jphd.12124
PMCID: PMC5019247
PMID: 26517578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]