477. Bioinformatics. 2006 Mar 1;22(5):597-605. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btk016. 
Epub 2005 Dec 20.

BioContrasts: extracting and exploiting protein-protein contrastive relations 
from biomedical literature.

Kim JJ(1), Zhang Z, Park JC, Ng SK.

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Division & AITrc, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea.

MOTIVATION: Contrasts are useful conceptual vehicles for learning processes and 
exploratory research of the unknown. For example, contrastive information 
between proteins can reveal what similarities, divergences and relations there 
are of the two proteins, leading to invaluable insights for better understanding 
about the proteins. Such contrastive information are found to be reported in the 
biomedical literature. However, there have been no reported attempts in current 
biomedical text mining work that systematically extract and present such useful 
contrastive information from the literature for exploitation.
RESULTS: Our BioContrasts system extracts protein-protein contrastive 
information from MEDLINE abstracts and presents the information to biologists in 
a web-application for exploitation. Contrastive information are identified in 
the text abstracts with contrastive negation patterns such as 'A but not B'. A 
total of 799 169 pairs of contrastive expressions were successfully extracted 
from 2.5 million MEDLINE abstracts. Using grounding of contrastive protein names 
to Swiss-Prot entries, we were able to produce 41 471 pieces of contrasts 
between Swiss-Prot protein entries. These contrastive pieces of information are 
then presented via a user-friendly interactive web portal that can be exploited 
for applications such as the refinement of biological pathways.
AVAILABILITY: BioContrasts can be accessed at 
http://biocontrasts.i2r.a-star.edu.sg. It is also mirrored at 
http://biocontrasts.biopathway.org.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary materials are available at 
Bioinformatics online.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btk016
PMID: 16368768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]