62. J Biomed Semantics. 2016 Apr 29;7(1):9. doi: 10.1186/s13326-015-0044-y.

miRiaD: A Text Mining Tool for Detecting Associations of microRNAs with 
Diseases.

Gupta S(1), Ross KE(2), Tudor CO(3)(2), Wu CH(3)(2), Schmidt CJ(4), 
Vijay-Shanker K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, 19711, USA. sgupta@udel.edu.
(2)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, 19711, USA.
(3)Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, 19711, USA.
(4)Department of Food and Animal Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 
19711, USA.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs are increasingly being appreciated as critical players in 
human diseases, and questions concerning the role of microRNAs arise in many 
areas of biomedical research. There are several manually curated databases of 
microRNA-disease associations gathered from the biomedical literature; however, 
it is difficult for curators of these databases to keep up with the explosion of 
publications in the microRNA-disease field. Moreover, automated literature 
mining tools that assist manual curation of microRNA-disease associations 
currently capture only one microRNA property (expression) in the context of one 
disease (cancer). Thus, there is a clear need to develop more sophisticated 
automated literature mining tools that capture a variety of microRNA properties 
and relations in the context of multiple diseases to provide researchers with 
fast access to the most recent published information and to streamline and 
accelerate manual curation.
METHODS: We have developed miRiaD (microRNAs in association with Disease), a 
text-mining tool that automatically extracts associations between microRNAs and 
diseases from the literature. These associations are often not directly linked, 
and the intermediate relations are often highly informative for the biomedical 
researcher. Thus, miRiaD extracts the miR-disease pairs together with an 
explanation for their association. We also developed a procedure that assigns 
scores to sentences, marking their informativeness, based on the 
microRNA-disease relation observed within the sentence.
RESULTS: miRiaD was applied to the entire Medline corpus, identifying 8301 PMIDs 
with miR-disease associations. These abstracts and the miR-disease associations 
are available for browsing at http://biotm.cis.udel.edu/miRiaD . We evaluated 
the recall and precision of miRiaD with respect to information of high interest 
to public microRNA-disease database curators (expression and target gene 
associations), obtaining a recall of 88.46-90.78. When we expanded the 
evaluation to include sentences with a wide range of microRNA-disease 
information that may be of interest to biomedical researchers, miRiaD also 
performed very well with a F-score of 89.4. The informativeness ranking of 
sentences was evaluated in terms of nDCG (0.977) and correlation metrics 
(0.678-0.727) when compared to an annotator's ranked list.
CONCLUSIONS: miRiaD, a high performance system that can capture a wide variety 
of microRNA-disease related information, extends beyond the scope of existing 
microRNA-disease resources. It can be incorporated into manual curation 
pipelines and serve as a resource for biomedical researchers interested in the 
role of microRNAs in disease. In our ongoing work we are developing an improved 
miRiaD web interface that will facilitate complex queries about microRNA-disease 
relationships, such as "In what diseases does microRNA regulation of apoptosis 
play a role?" or "Is there overlap in the sets of genes targeted by microRNAs in 
different types of dementia?"."

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-015-0044-y
PMCID: PMC4877743
PMID: 27216254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]