98. PLoS One. 2018 Jan 2;13(1):e0190028. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190028. 
eCollection 2018.

ORBDA: An openEHR benchmark dataset for performance assessment of electronic 
health record servers.

Teodoro D(1)(2)(3), Sundvall E(4)(5), João Junior M(1), Ruch P(2)(3), Miranda 
Freire S(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Tecnologia da Informação e Educação em Saúde, Universidade do 
Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)SIB Text Mining, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Information Science, HEG-Geneva, HES-SO, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Linköping University, Linköping, 
Sweden.
(5)Region Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden.

The openEHR specifications are designed to support implementation of flexible 
and interoperable Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems. Despite the increasing 
number of solutions based on the openEHR specifications, it is difficult to find 
publicly available healthcare datasets in the openEHR format that can be used to 
test, compare and validate different data persistence mechanisms for openEHR. To 
foster research on openEHR servers, we present the openEHR Benchmark Dataset, 
ORBDA, a very large healthcare benchmark dataset encoded using the openEHR 
formalism. To construct ORBDA, we extracted and cleaned a de-identified dataset 
from the Brazilian National Healthcare System (SUS) containing hospitalisation 
and high complexity procedures information and formalised it using a set of 
openEHR archetypes and templates. Then, we implemented a tool to enrich the raw 
relational data and convert it into the openEHR model using the openEHR Java 
reference model library. The ORBDA dataset is available in composition, 
versioned composition and EHR openEHR representations in XML and JSON formats. 
In total, the dataset contains more than 150 million composition records. We 
describe the dataset and provide means to access it. Additionally, we 
demonstrate the usage of ORBDA for evaluating inserting throughput and query 
latency performances of some NoSQL database management systems. We believe that 
ORBDA is a valuable asset for assessing storage models for openEHR-based 
information systems during the software engineering process. It may also be a 
suitable component in future standardised benchmarking of available openEHR 
storage platforms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0190028
PMCID: PMC5749730
PMID: 29293556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.