192. J Biomed Inform. 2016 Dec;64:158-167. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.10.008. Epub 2016 
Oct 11.

Text mining electronic hospital records to automatically classify admissions 
against disease: Measuring the impact of linking data sources.

Kocbek S(1), Cavedon L(2), Martinez D(3), Bain C(4), Manus CM(5), Haffari G(6), 
Zukerman I(6), Verspoor K(3).

Author information:
(1)Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 
Sydney, Australia; School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia; 
Department of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: skocbek@gmail.com.
(2)School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Department of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Mercy Health, Heidelberg, Australia; Faculty of Information Technology, 
Monash University, Clayton, Australia.
(5)Health Informatics Department, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia; Now 
with OzeScribe, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Text and data mining play an important role in obtaining insights 
from Health and Hospital Information Systems. This paper presents a text mining 
system for detecting admissions marked as positive for several diseases: Lung 
Cancer, Breast Cancer, Colon Cancer, Secondary Malignant Neoplasm of Respiratory 
and Digestive Organs, Multiple Myeloma and Malignant Plasma Cell Neoplasms, 
Pneumonia, and Pulmonary Embolism. We specifically examine the effect of linking 
multiple data sources on text classification performance.
METHODS: Support Vector Machine classifiers are built for eight data source 
combinations, and evaluated using the metrics of Precision, Recall and F-Score. 
Sub-sampling techniques are used to address unbalanced datasets of medical 
records. We use radiology reports as an initial data source and add other 
sources, such as pathology reports and patient and hospital admission data, in 
order to assess the research question regarding the impact of the value of 
multiple data sources. Statistical significance is measured using the Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test. A second set of experiments explores aspects of the system in 
greater depth, focusing on Lung Cancer. We explore the impact of feature 
selection; analyse the learning curve; examine the effect of restricting 
admissions to only those containing reports from all data sources; and examine 
the impact of reducing the sub-sampling. These experiments provide better 
understanding of how to best apply text classification in the context of 
imbalanced data of variable completeness.
RESULTS: Radiology questions plus patient and hospital admission data contribute 
valuable information for detecting most of the diseases, significantly improving 
performance when added to radiology reports alone or to the combination of 
radiology and pathology reports.
CONCLUSION: Overall, linking data sources significantly improved classification 
performance for all the diseases examined. However, there is no single approach 
that suits all scenarios; the choice of the most effective combination of data 
sources depends on the specific disease to be classified.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2016.10.008
PMID: 27742349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]