342. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012 Jul-Aug;19(4):597-603. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000622. Epub 2012 Mar 17.

The SMART Platform: early experience enabling substitutable applications for 
electronic health records.

Mandl KD(1), Mandel JC, Murphy SN, Bernstam EV, Ramoni RL, Kreda DA, McCoy JM, 
Adida B, Kohane IS.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital Informatics Program at Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and 
Technology, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. kenneth_mandl@harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: The Substitutable Medical Applications, Reusable Technologies (SMART) 
Platforms project seeks to develop a health information technology platform with 
substitutable applications (apps) constructed around core services. The authors 
believe this is a promising approach to driving down healthcare costs, 
supporting standards evolution, accommodating differences in care workflow, 
fostering competition in the market, and accelerating innovation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The Office of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology, through the Strategic Health IT Advanced Research 
Projects (SHARP) Program, funds the project. The SMART team has focused on 
enabling the property of substitutability through an app programming interface 
leveraging web standards, presenting predictable data payloads, and abstracting 
away many details of enterprise health information technology systems. 
Containers--health information technology systems, such as electronic health 
records (EHR), personally controlled health records, and health information 
exchanges that use the SMART app programming interface or a portion of 
it--marshal data sources and present data simply, reliably, and consistently to 
apps.
RESULTS: The SMART team has completed the first phase of the project (a) 
defining an app programming interface, (b) developing containers, and (c) 
producing a set of charter apps that showcase the system capabilities. A focal 
point of this phase was the SMART Apps Challenge, publicized by the White House, 
using http://www.challenge.gov website, and generating 15 app submissions with 
diverse functionality.
CONCLUSION: Key strategic decisions must be made about the most effective market 
for further disseminating SMART: existing market-leading EHR vendors, new 
entrants into the EHR market, or other stakeholders such as health information 
exchanges.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000622
PMCID: PMC3384120
PMID: 22427539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.