160. Yearb Med Inform. 2013;8:13-9.

State of the art in clinical informatics: evidence and examples.

McCoy AB(1), Wright A, Eysenbach G, Malin BA, Patterson ES, Xu H, Sittig DF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Healthcare Quality & Safety, The University of Texas, Health 
Science Center at Houston (UTHealth), 6410 Fannin St., UTP 1100.43, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. E-mail: Dean.F.Sittig@uth.tmc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: The field of clinical informatics has expanded substantially in the 
six decades since its inception. Early research focused on simple demonstrations 
that health information technology (HIT) such as electronic health records 
(EHRs), computerized provider order entry (CPOE), and clinical decision support 
(CDS) systems were feasible and potentially beneficial in clinical practice.
METHODS: In this review, we present recent evidence on clinical informatics in 
the United States covering three themes: 1) clinical informatics systems and 
interventions for providers, including EHRs, CPOE, CDS, and health information 
exchange; 2) consumer health informatics systems, including personal health 
records and web-based and mobile HIT; and 3) methods and governance for clinical 
informatics, including EHR usability; data mining, text mining, natural language 
processing, privacy, and security.
RESULTS: Substantial progress has been made in demonstrating that various 
clinical informatics methodologies and applications improve the structure, 
process, and outcomes of various facets of the healthcare system.
CONCLUSION: Over the coming years, much more will be expected from the field. As 
we move past the "early adopters" in Rogers' diffusion of innovations' curve 
through the "early majority" and into the "late majority," there will be a 
crucial need for new research methodologies and clinical applications that have 
been rigorously demonstrated to work (i.e., to improve health outcomes) in 
multiple settings with different types of patients and clinicians.

PMID: 23974543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]