56. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2019 May 1;26(5):438-446. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy189.

deepBioWSD: effective deep neural word sense disambiguation of biomedical text 
data.

Pesaranghader A(1)(2), Matwin S(1)(2), Sokolova M(2)(3)(4), Pesaranghader A(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, 
Canada.
(2)Institute for Big Data Analytics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, 
Canada.
(3)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
(4)School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1G 5Z3, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: In biomedicine, there is a wealth of information hidden in 
unstructured narratives such as research articles and clinical reports. To 
exploit these data properly, a word sense disambiguation (WSD) algorithm 
prevents downstream difficulties in the natural language processing applications 
pipeline. Supervised WSD algorithms largely outperform un- or semisupervised and 
knowledge-based methods; however, they train 1 separate classifier for each 
ambiguous term, necessitating a large number of expert-labeled training data, an 
unattainable goal in medical informatics. To alleviate this need, a single model 
that shares statistical strength across all instances and scales well with the 
vocabulary size is desirable.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Built on recent advances in deep learning, our deepBioWSD 
model leverages 1 single bidirectional long short-term memory network that makes 
sense prediction for any ambiguous term. In the model, first, the Unified 
Medical Language System sense embeddings will be computed using their text 
definitions; and then, after initializing the network with these embeddings, it 
will be trained on all (available) training data collectively. This method also 
considers a novel technique for automatic collection of training data from 
PubMed to (pre)train the network in an unsupervised manner.
RESULTS: We use the MSH WSD dataset to compare WSD algorithms, with macro and 
micro accuracies employed as evaluation metrics. deepBioWSD outperforms existing 
models in biomedical text WSD by achieving the state-of-the-art performance of 
96.82% for macro accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Apart from the disambiguation improvement and unsupervised 
training, deepBioWSD depends on considerably less number of expert-labeled data 
as it learns the target and the context terms jointly. These merit deepBioWSD to 
be conveniently deployable in real-time biomedical applications.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocy189
PMID: 30811548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]