639. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2016 Jul;23(4):692-700. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocw008. Epub 
2016 Mar 23.

CUSTOM-SEQ: a prototype for oncology rapid learning in a comprehensive EHR 
environment.

Warner JL(1), Wang L(2), Pao W(3), Sosman JA(3), Atreya RV(4), Carney P(2), Levy 
MA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA. Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA. jeremy.warner@vanderbilt.edu.
(2)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA. Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA. Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: As targeted cancer therapies and molecular profiling become 
widespread, the era of "precision oncology" is at hand. However, cancer genomes 
are complex, making mutation-specific outcomes difficult to track. We created a 
proof-of-principle, CUSTOM-SEQ: Continuously Updating System for Tracking 
Outcome by Mutation, to Support Evidence-based Querying, to automatically 
calculate and display mutation-specific survival statistics from electronic 
health record data.
METHODS: Patients with cancer genotyping were included, and clinical data was 
extracted through a variety of algorithms. Results were refreshed regularly and 
injected into a standard reporting platform. Significant results were 
highlighted for visual cueing. A subset was additionally stratified by stage, 
smoking status, and treatment exposure.
RESULTS: By August 2015, 4310 patients with a median follow-up of 17 months had 
sufficient data for survival calculation. As expected, epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) mutations in lung cancer were associated with superior overall 
survival, hazard ratio (HR) = 0.53 (P < .001), validating the approach. Guanine 
nucleotide binding protein (G protein), q polypeptide (GNAQ) mutations in 
melanoma were associated with inferior overall survival, a novel finding 
(HR = 3.42, P < .001). Smoking status was not prognostic for epidermal growth 
factor receptor-mutated lung cancer patients, who also lived significantly 
longer than their counterparts, even with advanced disease (HR = 0.54, 
P = .001).
INTERPRETATION: CUSTOM-SEQ represents a novel rapid learning system for a 
precision oncology environment. Retrospective studies are often limited by study 
of specific time periods and can lead to incomplete conclusions. Because data is 
continuously updated in CUSTOM-SEQ, the evidence base is constantly growing. 
Future work will allow users to interactively explore populations by 
demographics and treatment exposure, in order to further investigate significant 
mutation-specific signals.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocw008
PMCID: PMC4926743
PMID: 27008846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]