277. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2020 Jun 25;197:105616. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2020.105616. Online ahead of print.

CLIN-IK-LINKS: A platform for the design and execution of clinical data 
transformation and reasoning workflows.

Maldonado JA(1), Marcos M(2), Fernández-Breis JT(3), Giménez-Solano VM(2), 
Legaz-García MDC(4), Martínez-Salvador B(2).

Author information:
(1)Veratech for Health SL, Avenida del Puerto 237-1, Valencia 46011, Spain. 
Electronic address: almalseg@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering and Science, Universitat Jaume I, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Informática y Sistemas, Universidad de Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, 
Spain.
(4)Departamento de Informática y Sistemas, Universidad de Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, 
Spain; Fundación para la Formación e Investigación Sanitarias de la Región de 
Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Effective sharing and reuse of Electronic Health 
Records (EHR) requires technological solutions which deal with different 
representations and different models of data. This includes information models, 
domain models and, ideally, inference models, which enable clinical decision 
support based on a knowledge base and facts. Our goal is to develop a framework 
to support EHR interoperability based on transformation and reasoning services 
intended for clinical data and knowledge.
METHODS: Our framework is based on workflows whose primary components are 
reusable mappings. Key features are an integrated representation, storage, and 
exploitation of different types of mappings for clinical data transformation 
purposes, as well as the support for the discovery of new workflows. The current 
framework supports mappings which take advantage of the best features of EHR 
standards and ontologies. Our proposal is based on our previous results and 
experience working with both technological infrastructures.
RESULTS: We have implemented CLIN-IK-LINKS, a web-based platform that enables 
users to create, modify and delete mappings as well as to define and execute 
workflows. The platform has been applied in two use cases: semantic publishing 
of clinical laboratory test results; and implementation of two colorectal cancer 
screening protocols. Real data have been used in both use cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The CLIN-IK-LINKS platform allows the composition and execution of 
clinical data transformation workflows to convert EHR data into EHR and/or 
semantic web standards. Having proved its usefulness to implement clinical data 
transformation applications of interest, CLIN-IK-LINKS can be regarded as a 
valuable contribution to improve the semantic interoperability of EHR systems.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2020.105616
PMID: 32629294

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.