529. J Biomed Inform. 2019 Sep;97:103267. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103267. Epub 2019 
Aug 8.

Cross-registry neural domain adaptation to extract mutational test results from 
pathology reports.

Rios A(1), Durbin EB(2), Hands I(3), Arnold SM(4), Shah D(5), Schwartz SM(6), 
Goulart BHL(6), Kavuluru R(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Systems and Cyber Security, University of Texas at 
San Antonio, USA.
(2)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Dept. of Internal Medicine, University of 
Kentucky, USA; Kentucky Cancer Registry, Lexington, KY, USA.
(3)Kentucky Cancer Registry, Lexington, KY, USA.
(4)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(5)Ironwood Cancer and Research Centers, Avondale, AZ, USA.
(6)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Dept. of Internal Medicine, University of 
Kentucky, USA; Computer Science Department, University of Kentucky, USA. 
Electronic address: ramakanth.kavuluru@uky.edu.

OBJECTIVE: We study the performance of machine learning (ML) methods, including 
neural networks (NNs), to extract mutational test results from pathology reports 
collected by cancer registries. Given the lack of hand-labeled datasets for 
mutational test result extraction, we focus on the particular use-case of 
extracting Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor mutation results in non-small cell 
lung cancers. We explore the generalization of NNs across different registries 
where our goals are twofold: (1) to assess how well models trained on a 
registry's data port to test data from a different registry and (2) to assess 
whether and to what extent such models can be improved using state-of-the-art 
neural domain adaptation techniques under different assumptions about what is 
available (labeled vs unlabeled data) at the target registry site.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We collected data from two registries: the Kentucky 
Cancer Registry (KCR) and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FH) Cancer 
Surveillance System. We combine NNs with adversarial domain adaptation to 
improve cross-registry performance. We compare to other classifiers in the 
standard supervised classification, unsupervised domain adaptation, and 
supervised domain adaptation scenarios.
RESULTS: The performance of ML methods varied between registries. To extract 
positive results, the basic convolutional neural network (CNN) had an F1 of 
71.5% on the KCR dataset and 95.7% on the FH dataset. For the KCR dataset, the 
CNN F1 results were low when trained on FH data (Positive F1: 23%). Using our 
proposed adversarial CNN, without any labeled data, we match the F1 of the 
models trained directly on each target registry's data. The adversarial CNN F1 
improved when trained on FH and applied to KCR dataset (Positive F1: 70.8%). We 
found similar performance improvements when we trained on KCR and tested on FH 
reports (Positive F1: 45% to 96%).
CONCLUSION: Adversarial domain adaptation improves the performance of NNs 
applied to pathology reports. In the unsupervised domain adaptation setting, we 
match the performance of models that are trained directly on target registry's 
data by using source registry's labeled data and unlabeled examples from the 
target registry.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103267
PMCID: PMC6736690
PMID: 31401235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS None