409. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Jun 2;5:26. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-26. eCollection 
2014.

Generalising semantic category disambiguation with large lexical resources for 
fun and profit.

Stenetorp P(1), Pyysalo S(2), Ananiadou S(2), Tsujii J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK ; 
National Centre for Text Mining, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK ; 
National Centre for Text Mining, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK ; 
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Semantic Category Disambiguation (SCD) is the task of assigning the 
appropriate semantic category to given spans of text from a fixed set of 
candidate categories, for example Protein to "Fibrin". SCD is relevant to 
Natural Language Processing tasks such as Named Entity Recognition, coreference 
resolution and coordination resolution. In this work, we study machine 
learning-based SCD methods using large lexical resources and approximate string 
matching, aiming to generalise these methods with regard to domains, lexical 
resources and the composition of data sets. We specifically consider the 
applicability of SCD for the purposes of supporting human annotators and acting 
as a pipeline component for other Natural Language Processing systems.
RESULTS: While previous research has mostly cast SCD purely as a classification 
task, we consider a task setting that allows for multiple semantic categories to 
be suggested, aiming to minimise the number of suggestions while maintaining 
high recall. We argue that this setting reflects aspects which are essential for 
both a pipeline component and when supporting human annotators. We introduce an 
SCD method based on a recently introduced machine learning-based system and 
evaluate it on 15 corpora covering biomedical, clinical and newswire texts and 
ranging in the number of semantic categories from 2 to 91. With appropriate 
settings, our system maintains an average recall of 99% while reducing the 
number of candidate semantic categories on average by 65% over all data sets.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning-based SCD using large lexical resources and 
approximate string matching is sensitive to the selection and granularity of 
lexical resources, but generalises well to a wide range of text domains and data 
sets given appropriate resources and parameter settings. By substantially 
reducing the number of candidate categories while only very rarely excluding the 
correct one, our method is shown to be applicable to manual annotation support 
tasks and use as a high-recall component in text processing pipelines. The 
introduced system and all related resources are freely available for research 
purposes at: https://github.com/ninjin/simsem.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-26
PMCID: PMC4107982
PMID: 25093067