294. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Feb;53:162-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.10.006. Epub 2014 
Oct 18.

Using electronic health records for clinical research: the case of the EHR4CR 
project.

De Moor G(1), Sundgren M(2), Kalra D(3), Schmidt A(4), Dugas M(5), Claerhout 
B(6), Karakoyun T(7), Ohmann C(7), Lastic PY(8), Ammour N(8), Kush R(9), Dupont 
D(10), Cuggia M(11), Daniel C(12), Thienpont G(13), Coorevits P(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Unit of Medical Informatics and Statistics, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; The European Institute for Health Records 
(EuroRec), Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium; Custodix NV, Sint-Martens-Latem, 
Belgium.
(2)AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal, Sweden.
(3)University College London, London, UK.
(4)Pharma Product Development, F Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(6)Custodix NV, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium.
(7)Coordination Centre for Clinical Trials, Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Duesseldorf, Germany.
(8)Sanofi R&D, Chilly-Mazarin, France.
(9)Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC), United States.
(10)Data Mining International SA, Geneva, Switzerland.
(11)INSERM CIC-P, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France.
(12)INSERM, UMR_S 1142, LIMICS, Paris, France; CCS SI Patient, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.
(13)Research in Advanced Medical Informatics and Telematics vzw (RAMIT), Ghent, 
Belgium.
(14)Department of Public Health, Unit of Medical Informatics and Statistics, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; The European Institute for Health Records 
(EuroRec), Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium. Electronic address: 
pascal.coorevits@telenet.be.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the IMI EHR4CR project which is designing and 
developing, and aims to demonstrate, a scalable, widely acceptable and efficient 
approach to interoperability between EHR systems and clinical research systems.
METHODS: The IMI EHR4CR project is combining and extending several previously 
isolated state-of-the-art technical components through a new approach to develop 
a platform for reusing EHR data to support medical research. This will be 
achieved through multiple but unified initiatives across different major disease 
areas (e.g. cardiovascular, cancer) and clinical research use cases (protocol 
feasibility, patient identification and recruitment, clinical trial execution 
and serious adverse event reporting), with various local and national 
stakeholders across several countries and therefore under various legal 
frameworks.
RESULTS: An initial instance of the platform has been built, providing 
communication, security and terminology services to the eleven participating 
hospitals and ten pharmaceutical companies located in seven European countries. 
Proof-of-concept demonstrators have been built and evaluated for the protocol 
feasibility and patient recruitment scenarios. The specifications of the 
clinical trial execution and the adverse event reporting scenarios have been 
documented and reviewed.
CONCLUSIONS: Through a combination of a consortium that brings collectively many 
years of experience from previous relevant EU projects and of the global conduct 
of clinical trials, of an approach to ethics that engages many important 
stakeholders across Europe to ensure acceptability, of a robust iterative design 
methodology for the platform services that is anchored on requirements of an 
underlying Service Oriented Architecture that has been designed to be scalable 
and adaptable, EHR4CR could be well placed to deliver a sound, useful and well 
accepted pan-European solution for the reuse of hospital EHR data to support 
clinical research studies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2014.10.006
PMID: 25463966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]