473. PeerJ. 2020 Feb 17;8:e8580. doi: 10.7717/peerj.8580. eCollection 2020.

DISNET: a framework for extracting phenotypic disease information from public 
sources.

Lagunes-García G(1), Rodríguez-González A(1)(2), Prieto-Santamaría L(1), García 
Del Valle EP(1), Zanin M(1), Menasalvas-Ruiz E(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Tecnología Biomédica, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Pozuelo de 
Alarcón, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros Informáticos, Universidad Politécnica 
de Madrid, Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Within the global endeavour of improving population health, one 
major challenge is the identification and integration of medical knowledge 
spread through several information sources. The creation of a comprehensive 
dataset of diseases and their clinical manifestations based on information from 
public sources is an interesting approach that allows one not only to complement 
and merge medical knowledge but also to increase it and thereby to interconnect 
existing data and analyse and relate diseases to each other. In this paper, we 
present DISNET (http://disnet.ctb.upm.es/), a web-based system designed to 
periodically extract the knowledge from signs and symptoms retrieved from 
medical databases, and to enable the creation of customisable disease networks.
METHODS: We here present the main features of the DISNET system. We describe how 
information on diseases and their phenotypic manifestations is extracted from 
Wikipedia and PubMed websites; specifically, texts from these sources are 
processed through a combination of text mining and natural language processing 
techniques.
RESULTS: We further present the validation of our system on Wikipedia and PubMed 
texts, obtaining the relevant accuracy. The final output includes the creation 
of a comprehensive symptoms-disease dataset, shared (free access) through the 
system's API. We finally describe, with some simple use cases, how a user can 
interact with it and extract information that could be used for subsequent 
analyses.
DISCUSSION: DISNET allows retrieving knowledge about the signs, symptoms and 
diagnostic tests associated with a disease. It is not limited to a specific 
category (all the categories that the selected sources of information offer us) 
and clinical diagnosis terms. It further allows to track the evolution of those 
terms through time, being thus an opportunity to analyse and observe the 
progress of human knowledge on diseases. We further discussed the validation of 
the system, suggesting that it is good enough to be used to extract diseases and 
diagnostically-relevant terms. At the same time, the evaluation also revealed 
that improvements could be introduced to enhance the system's reliability.

©2020 Lagunes-García et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8580
PMCID: PMC7032061
PMID: 32110491

Conflict of interest statement: Massimiliano Zanin is an Academic Editor for 
PeerJ.