214. J Biomed Inform. 2014 Apr;48:160-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.12.012. Epub 2013 
Dec 25.

PARAMO: a PARAllel predictive MOdeling platform for healthcare analytic research 
using electronic health records.

Ng K(1), Ghoting A(2), Steinhubl SR(3), Stewart WF(4), Malin B(5), Sun J(2).

Author information:
(1)IBM TJ Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, United States. 
Electronic address: kenney.ng@us.ibm.com.
(2)IBM TJ Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, United States.
(3)Scripps Translational Science Institute, LaJolla, CA, United States; 
Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, PA, United States.
(4)Sutter Health, Concord, CA, United States.
(5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, United States; Department of Electrical Engineering 
and Computer Science, School of Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
TN, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Healthcare analytics research increasingly involves the construction 
of predictive models for disease targets across varying patient cohorts using 
electronic health records (EHRs). To facilitate this process, it is critical to 
support a pipeline of tasks: (1) cohort construction, (2) feature construction, 
(3) cross-validation, (4) feature selection, and (5) classification. To develop 
an appropriate model, it is necessary to compare and refine models derived from 
a diversity of cohorts, patient-specific features, and statistical frameworks. 
The goal of this work is to develop and evaluate a predictive modeling platform 
that can be used to simplify and expedite this process for health data.
METHODS: To support this goal, we developed a PARAllel predictive MOdeling 
(PARAMO) platform which (1) constructs a dependency graph of tasks from 
specifications of predictive modeling pipelines, (2) schedules the tasks in a 
topological ordering of the graph, and (3) executes those tasks in parallel. We 
implemented this platform using Map-Reduce to enable independent tasks to run in 
parallel in a cluster computing environment. Different task scheduling 
preferences are also supported.
RESULTS: We assess the performance of PARAMO on various workloads using three 
datasets derived from the EHR systems in place at Geisinger Health System and 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center and an anonymous longitudinal claims 
database. We demonstrate significant gains in computational efficiency against a 
standard approach. In particular, PARAMO can build 800 different models on a 
300,000 patient data set in 3h in parallel compared to 9days if running 
sequentially.
CONCLUSION: This work demonstrates that an efficient parallel predictive 
modeling platform can be developed for EHR data. This platform can facilitate 
large-scale modeling endeavors and speed-up the research workflow and reuse of 
health information. This platform is only a first step and provides the 
foundation for our ultimate goal of building analytic pipelines that are 
specialized for health data researchers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2013.12.012
PMCID: PMC4075460
PMID: 24370496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]