621. Pediatrics. 2015 Jul;136(1):e215-24. doi: 10.1542/peds.2015-0673. Epub 2015 Jun 
22.

Comparative Effectiveness Research Through a Collaborative Electronic Reporting 
Consortium.

Fiks AG(1), Grundmeier RW(2), Steffes J(3), Adams WG(4), Kaelber DC(5), Pace 
WD(6), Wasserman RC(7); Comparative Effectiveness Research Through Collaborative 
Electronic Reporting (CER2) Consortium.

Author information:
(1)The Pediatric Research Consortium, Department of Biomedical and Health 
Informatics, Center for Pediatric Clinical Effectiveness, and PolicyLab at The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Pediatric 
Research in Office Settings, American Academy of Pediatrics, Elk Grove Village, 
Illinois; fiks@email.chop.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics.
(3)Pediatric Research in Office Settings, American Academy of Pediatrics, Elk 
Grove Village, Illinois;
(4)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts;
(5)Departments of Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, and Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics and the Center for Clinical Informatics Research and Education, 
The MetroHealth System, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio;
(6)American Academy of Family Physicians National Research Network, Leawood, 
Kansas; and.
(7)Pediatric Research in Office Settings, American Academy of Pediatrics, Elk 
Grove Village, Illinois; Department of Pediatrics, University of Vermont College 
of Medicine, Burlington, Vermont.

The United States lacks a system to use routinely collected electronic health 
record (EHR) clinical data to conduct comparative effectiveness research (CER) 
on pediatric drug therapeutics and other child health topics. This Special 
Article describes the creation and details of a network of EHR networks devised 
to use clinical data in EHRs for conducting CER, led by the American Academy of 
Pediatrics Pediatric Research in Office Settings (PROS). To achieve this goal, 
PROS has linked data from its own EHR-based "ePROS" network with data from 
independent practices and health systems across the United States. Beginning 
with 4 of proof-of-concept retrospective CER studies on psychotropic and asthma 
medication use and side effects with a planned full-scale prospective CER study 
on treatment of pediatric hypertension, the Comparative Effectiveness Research 
Through Collaborative Electronic Reporting (CER(2)) collaborators are developing 
a platform to advance the methodology of pediatric pharmacoepidemiology. CER(2) 
will provide a resource for future CER studies in pediatric drug therapeutics 
and other child health topics. This article outlines the vision for and present 
composition of this network, governance, and challenges and opportunities for 
using the network to advance child health and health care. The goal of this 
network is to engage child health researchers from around the United States in 
participating in collaborative research using the CER(2) database.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2015-0673
PMID: 26101357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]