252. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 19;11(9):e0162287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162287. 
eCollection 2016.

Mapping Phenotypic Information in Heterogeneous Textual Sources to a 
Domain-Specific Terminological Resource.

Alnazzawi N(1), Thompson P(1), Ananiadou S(1).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 
Manchester University, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Biomedical literature articles and narrative content from Electronic Health 
Records (EHRs) both constitute rich sources of disease-phenotype information. 
Phenotype concepts may be mentioned in text in multiple ways, using phrases with 
a variety of structures. This variability stems partly from the different 
backgrounds of the authors, but also from the different writing styles typically 
used in each text type. Since EHR narrative reports and literature articles 
contain different but complementary types of valuable information, combining 
details from each text type can help to uncover new disease-phenotype 
associations. However, the alternative ways in which the same concept may be 
mentioned in each source constitutes a barrier to the automatic integration of 
information. Accordingly, identification of the unique concepts represented by 
phrases in text can help to bridge the gap between text types. We describe our 
development of a novel method, PhenoNorm, which integrates a number of different 
similarity measures to allow automatic linking of phenotype concept mentions to 
known concepts in the UMLS Metathesaurus, a biomedical terminological resource. 
PhenoNorm was developed using the PhenoCHF corpus-a collection of literature 
articles and narratives in EHRs, annotated for phenotypic information relating 
to congestive heart failure (CHF). We evaluate the performance of PhenoNorm in 
linking CHF-related phenotype mentions to Metathesaurus concepts, using a newly 
enriched version of PhenoCHF, in which each phenotype mention has an 
expert-verified link to a concept in the UMLS Metathesaurus. We show that 
PhenoNorm outperforms a number of alternative methods applied to the same task. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate PhenoNorm's wider utility, by evaluating its ability 
to link mentions of various other types of medically-related information, 
occurring in texts covering wider subject areas, to concepts in different 
terminological resources. We show that PhenoNorm can maintain performance 
levels, and that its accuracy compares favourably to other methods applied to 
these tasks.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162287
PMCID: PMC5028053
PMID: 27643689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.