562. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2020 May 15;13:433-445. doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S247878. 
eCollection 2020.

Intelligent Telehealth System To Support Epilepsy Diagnosis.

Molina E(1), Sarmiento Torres CE(2), Salazar-Cabrera R(1), López DM(1), 
Vargas-Cañas R(2).

Author information:
(1)Telematics Department, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, Cauca, Colombia.
(2)Department of Physics, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, Cauca, Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Availability and opportunity of epilepsy diagnostic services is a 
significant challenge, especially in developing countries with a low number of 
neurologists. The most commonly used test to diagnose epilepsy is 
﻿electroencephalogram (EEG). A typical EEG recording lasts for 20 to 30 minutes; 
however, a specialist requires much more time to read it. Furthermore, no 
evidence was found in the literature on open-source systems for the 
cost-effective management of patient information using ﻿electronic ﻿health 
﻿records (EHR) that adequately integrate EEG analysis for automatic 
identification of abnormal signals.
OBJECTIVE: To develop an integrated open-source EHR system for the management of 
the patients' personal, clinical, and EEG data, and for automatic identification 
of abnormal EEG signals.
METHODS: The core of the system is an EHR and telehealth service based on the 
OpenMRS platform. On top of that, we developed an intelligent component to 
automatically detect abnormal segments of EEG tests using ﻿machine ﻿learning 
algorithms, as well as a service to annotate and visualize abnormal segments in 
EEG signals. Finally, we evaluated the intelligent component and the integrated 
system using precision, recall, and accuracy metrics.
RESULTS: The system allowed to manage patients' information properly, store and 
manage the EEG tests recorded with a medical EEG device, and to detect abnormal 
segments of signals with a precision of 85.10%, a recall of 97.16%, and an 
accuracy of 99.92%.
CONCLUSION: Digital health is a multidisciplinary field of research in which 
artificial intelligence is playing a significant role in boosting traditional 
health services. Notably, the developed system could significantly reduce the 
time a neurologist spends in the reading of an EEG for the diagnosis of 
epilepsy, saving approximately 65-75% of the time consumed. It can be used in a 
telehealth environment. In this way, the availability and provision of 
diagnostic services for epilepsy management could be improved, especially in 
developing countries where the number of neurologists is low.

© 2020 Molina et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JMDH.S247878
PMCID: PMC7237117
PMID: 32523350

Conflict of interest statement: Mr Edward Molina reports grants from Colombian 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Innovation Colciencias, during the conduct 
of the study. The authors declare no other conflicts of interest.