111. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2019 Jul 3;7:156. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00156. 
eCollection 2019.

SemNet: Using Local Features to Navigate the Biomedical Concept Graph.

Sedler AR(1), Mitchell CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Pathology Dynamics, Department of Biomedical Engineering, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA, United States.

Literature-Based Discovery (LBD) aims to connect scientists across silos by 
assembling models of the literature to reveal previously hidden connections. 
Unfortunately, LBD systems have been unable to achieve user adoption on a large 
scale. This work develops opens source software in Python to convert a database 
of semantic predications of all of PubMed's 27.9 million indexed abstracts into 
a semantic inference network and biomedical concept graph in Neo4j. The 
developed software, called SemNet, queries a modified version of the publicly 
available SemMedDB and computes feature vectors on source-target pairs. Each 
unique United Medical Language System (UMLS) concept is represented as a node 
and each predication as an edge. Each node is assigned one of 132 node labels 
(e.g., Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein (AAPP); Gene or Genome (GG); etc.) and 
each edge is labeled with one of 58 predications (e.g. treats, causes, inhibits, 
etc.). SemNet computes a single feature value for each metapath, or sequence of 
node types, between a source node and user-specified target node(s). Several 
different types of metapath-based features (count, degree weighted path count, 
and HeteSim metric) are computed and vectorized. SemNet employs an unsupervised 
learning algorithm for rank aggregation (ULARA) to rank identified source nodes 
that are most relevant to the user-specified target nodes(s). Statistical 
analysis of correlation among identified source nodes or resultant literature 
network features are used to identify patterns that can guide future research. 
Analysis of high residual nodes is used to compare and contrast SemNet rankings 
between different targets of interest. An example SemNet use case is presented 
to assess "the differential impact of smoking on cognition in males and females" 
using the following target nodes: nicotine, learning, memory, 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), cigarette smoke, X chromosome, and Y chromosome. 
Detailed rankings are discussed. Overall results suggest a hypothesis where 
smoking negatively impacts cognition to a greater extent in females, but smoking 
has stronger cardiovascular impacts in males. In summary, SemNet provides an 
adoptable method for efficient LBD of PubMed that extends beyond omics-only 
relationships to true multi-scalar connections that can provide actionable 
insight for predictive medicine, research prioritization, and clinical care.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00156
PMCID: PMC6616276
PMID: 31334227