628. J Clin Epidemiol. 2020 Feb;118:100-106. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2019.11.006. 
Epub 2019 Nov 12.

Data mining information from electronic health records produced high yield and 
accuracy for current smoking status.

Groenhof TKJ(1), Koers LR(2), Blasse E(3), de Groot M(3), Grobbee DE(2), Bots 
ML(2), Asselbergs FW(4), Lely AT(5), Haitjema S(3); UPOD; UCC-CVRM Study Groups.

Collaborators: van Solinge W, Hoefer I, Haitjema S, de Groot M, Blasse E, 
Asselbergs FW(6), Nathoe HM(6), de Borst GJ(7), Bots ML(8), Geerlings MI(8), 
Emmelot MH(9), de Jong PA(10), Leiner T(10), Lely AT(11), van der Kaaij NP(12), 
Kappelle LJ(13), Ruigrok YM(13), Verhaar MC(14), Visseren FLJ(15), Westerink 
J(15).

Author information:
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
t.k.j.groenhof@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Health Data Research UK, Institute of Health Informatics, University College 
London, London, UK; Department of Cardiology, Division Heart & Lungs, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Institute 
of Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, University 
College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Obstetrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Vascular Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Geriatrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Radiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Nephrology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Vascular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Researchers are increasingly using routine clinical data for care 
evaluations and feedback to patients and clinicians. The quality of these 
evaluations depends on the quality and completeness of the input data.
STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING: We assessed the performance of an electronic health 
record (EHR)-based data mining algorithm, using the example of the smoking 
status in a cardiovascular population. As a reference standard, we used the 
questionnaire from the Utrecht Cardiovascular Cohort (UCC). To assess diagnostic 
accuracy, we calculated sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value 
(NPV), and positive predictive value (PPV).
RESULTS: We analyzed 1,661 patients included in the UCC to January 18, 2019. Of 
those, 14% (n = 238) had missing information on smoking status in the UCC 
questionnaire. Data mining provided information on smoking status in 99% of the 
1,661 participants. Diagnostic accuracy for current smoking was sensitivity 88%, 
specificity 92%, NPV 98%, and PPV 63%. From false positives, 85% reported they 
had quit smoking at the time of the UCC.
CONCLUSION: Data mining showed great potential in retrieving information on 
smoking (a near complete yield). Its diagnostic performance is good for negative 
smoking statuses. The implications of misclassification with data mining are 
dependent on the application of the data.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2019.11.006
PMID: 31730918