129. J Med Internet Res. 2017 Oct 30;19(10):e361. doi: 10.2196/jmir.8164.

Discovering Cohorts of Pregnant Women From Social Media for Safety Surveillance 
and Analysis.

Sarker A(1), Chandrashekar P(2), Magge A(2), Cai H(1), Klein A(1), Gonzalez 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State University, Scottsdale, 
AZ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Pregnancy exposure registries are the primary sources of information 
about the safety of maternal usage of medications during pregnancy. Such 
registries enroll pregnant women in a voluntary fashion early on in pregnancy 
and follow them until the end of pregnancy or longer to systematically collect 
information regarding specific pregnancy outcomes. Although the model of 
pregnancy registries has distinct advantages over other study designs, they are 
faced with numerous challenges and limitations such as low enrollment rate, high 
cost, and selection bias.
OBJECTIVE: The primary objectives of this study were to systematically assess 
whether social media (Twitter) can be used to discover cohorts of pregnant women 
and to develop and deploy a natural language processing and machine learning 
pipeline for the automatic collection of cohort information. In addition, we 
also attempted to ascertain, in a preliminary fashion, what types of 
longitudinal information may potentially be mined from the collected cohort 
information.
METHODS: Our discovery of pregnant women relies on detecting 
pregnancy-indicating tweets (PITs), which are statements posted by pregnant 
women regarding their pregnancies. We used a set of 14 patterns to first detect 
potential PITs. We manually annotated a sample of 14,156 of the retrieved user 
posts to distinguish real PITs from false positives and trained a supervised 
classification system to detect real PITs. We optimized the classification 
system via cross validation, with features and settings targeted toward 
optimizing precision for the positive class. For users identified to be posting 
real PITs via automatic classification, our pipeline collected all their 
available past and future posts from which other information (eg, medication 
usage and fetal outcomes) may be mined.
RESULTS: Our rule-based PIT detection approach retrieved over 200,000 posts over 
a period of 18 months. Manual annotation agreement for three annotators was very 
high at kappa (κ)=.79. On a blind test set, the implemented classifier obtained 
an overall F1 score of 0.84 (0.88 for the pregnancy class and 0.68 for the 
nonpregnancy class). Precision for the pregnancy class was 0.93, and recall was 
0.84. Feature analysis showed that the combination of dense and sparse vectors 
for classification achieved optimal performance. Employing the trained 
classifier resulted in the identification of 71,954 users from the collected 
posts. Over 250 million posts were retrieved for these users, which provided a 
multitude of longitudinal information about them.
CONCLUSIONS: Social media sources such as Twitter can be used to identify large 
cohorts of pregnant women and to gather longitudinal information via automated 
processing of their postings. Considering the many drawbacks and limitations of 
pregnancy registries, social media mining may provide beneficial complementary 
information. Although the cohort sizes identified over social media are large, 
future research will have to assess the completeness of the information 
available through them.

©Abeed Sarker, Pramod Chandrashekar, Arjun Magge, Haitao Cai, Ari Klein, 
Graciela Gonzalez. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet 
Research (http://www.jmir.org), 30.10.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.8164
PMCID: PMC5684515
PMID: 29084707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.