444. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2008:580-91.

Enabling integrative genomic analysis of high-impact human diseases through text 
mining.

Dudley J(1), Butte AJ.

Author information:
(1)Stanford Medical Informatics, Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5479, USA.

Our limited ability to perform large-scale translational discovery and analysis 
of disease characterizations from public genomic data repositories remains a 
major bottleneck in efforts to translate genomics experiments to medicine. 
Through comprehensive, integrative genomic analysis of all available human 
disease characterizations we gain crucial insight into the molecular phenomena 
underlying pathogenesis as well as intra- and inter-disease differentiation. 
Such knowledge is crucial in the development of improved clinical diagnostics 
and the identification of molecular targets for novel therapeutics. In this 
study we build on our previous work to realize the next important step in 
large-scale translational discovery and analysis, which is to automatically 
identify those genomic experiments in which a disease state is compared to a 
normal control state. We present an automated text mining method that employs 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to automatically identify 
disease-related experiments in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) that 
include measurements for both disease and normal control states. In this manner, 
we find that 62% of disease-related experiments contain sample subsets that can 
be automatically identified as normal controls. Furthermore, we calculate that 
the identified experiments characterize diseases that contribute to 30% of all 
human disease-related mortality in the United States. This work demonstrates 
that we now have the necessary tools and methods to initiate large-scale 
translational bioinformatics inquiry across the broad spectrum of high-impact 
human disease.

PMCID: PMC2735266
PMID: 18229717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]