66. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2015 Sep 30;15:77. doi: 10.1186/s12911-015-0200-4.

Semantic biomedical resource discovery: a Natural Language Processing framework.

Sfakianaki P(1), Koumakis L(2), Sfakianakis S(1), Iatraki G(1), Zacharioudakis 
G(1), Graf N(3), Marias K(1), Tsiknakis M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas (FORTH), Institute of Computer 
Science, N. Plastira 100, Vassilika Vouton, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas (FORTH), Institute of Computer 
Science, N. Plastira 100, Vassilika Vouton, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. 
koumakis@ics.forth.gr.
(3)Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Saarland University Hospital, Homburg, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Informatics Engineering, Technological Educational Institute, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

BACKGROUND: A plethora of publicly available biomedical resources do currently 
exist and are constantly increasing at a fast rate. In parallel, specialized 
repositories are been developed, indexing numerous clinical and biomedical 
tools. The main drawback of such repositories is the difficulty in locating 
appropriate resources for a clinical or biomedical decision task, especially for 
non-Information Technology expert users. In parallel, although NLP research in 
the clinical domain has been active since the 1960s, progress in the development 
of NLP applications has been slow and lags behind progress in the general NLP 
domain. The aim of the present study is to investigate the use of semantics for 
biomedical resources annotation with domain specific ontologies and exploit 
Natural Language Processing methods in empowering the non-Information Technology 
expert users to efficiently search for biomedical resources using natural 
language.
METHODS: A Natural Language Processing engine which can "translate" free text 
into targeted queries, automatically transforming a clinical research question 
into a request description that contains only terms of ontologies, has been 
implemented. The implementation is based on information extraction techniques 
for text in natural language, guided by integrated ontologies. Furthermore, 
knowledge from robust text mining methods has been incorporated to map 
descriptions into suitable domain ontologies in order to ensure that the 
biomedical resources descriptions are domain oriented and enhance the accuracy 
of services discovery. The framework is freely available as a web application at 
( http://calchas.ics.forth.gr/ ).
RESULTS: For our experiments, a range of clinical questions were established 
based on descriptions of clinical trials from the ClinicalTrials.gov registry as 
well as recommendations from clinicians. Domain experts manually identified the 
available tools in a tools repository which are suitable for addressing the 
clinical questions at hand, either individually or as a set of tools forming a 
computational pipeline. The results were compared with those obtained from an 
automated discovery of candidate biomedical tools. For the evaluation of the 
results, precision and recall measurements were used. Our results indicate that 
the proposed framework has a high precision and low recall, implying that the 
system returns essentially more relevant results than irrelevant.
CONCLUSIONS: There are adequate biomedical ontologies already available, 
sufficiency of existing NLP tools and quality of biomedical annotation systems 
for the implementation of a biomedical resources discovery framework, based on 
the semantic annotation of resources and the use on NLP techniques. The results 
of the present study demonstrate the clinical utility of the application of the 
proposed framework which aims to bridge the gap between clinical question in 
natural language and efficient dynamic biomedical resources discovery.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-015-0200-4
PMCID: PMC4591066
PMID: 26423616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]