218. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2008 Jan-Feb;15(1):87-98. doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2401. Epub 
2007 Oct 18.

Automated acquisition of disease drug knowledge from biomedical and clinical 
documents: an initial study.

Chen ES(1), Hripcsak G, Xu H, Markatou M, Friedman C.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Informatics Research & Development, Partners HealthCare System, 93 
Worcester Street, PO Box 81902, Wellesley, MA 02481, USA. eschen@partners.org

OBJECTIVE: Explore the automated acquisition of knowledge in biomedical and 
clinical documents using text mining and statistical techniques to identify 
disease-drug associations.
DESIGN: Biomedical literature and clinical narratives from the patient record 
were mined to gather knowledge about disease-drug associations. Two NLP systems, 
BioMedLEE and MedLEE, were applied to Medline articles and discharge summaries, 
respectively. Disease and drug entities were identified using the NLP systems in 
addition to MeSH annotations for the Medline articles. Focusing on eight 
diseases, co-occurrence statistics were applied to compute and evaluate the 
strength of association between each disease and relevant drugs.
RESULTS: Ranked lists of disease-drug pairs were generated and cutoffs 
calculated for identifying stronger associations among these pairs for further 
analysis. Differences and similarities between the text sources (i.e., 
biomedical literature and patient record) and annotations (i.e., MeSH and 
NLP-extracted UMLS concepts) with regards to disease-drug knowledge were 
observed.
CONCLUSION: This paper presents a method for acquiring disease-specific 
knowledge and a feasibility study of the method. The method is based on applying 
a combination of NLP and statistical techniques to both biomedical and clinical 
documents. The approach enabled extraction of knowledge about the drugs 
clinicians are using for patients with specific diseases based on the patient 
record, while it is also acquired knowledge of drugs frequently involved in 
controlled trials for those same diseases. In comparing the disease-drug 
associations, we found the results to be appropriate: the two text sources 
contained consistent as well as complementary knowledge, and manual review of 
the top five disease-drug associations by a medical expert supported their 
correctness across the diseases.

DOI: 10.1197/jamia.M2401
PMCID: PMC2274872
PMID: 17947625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]