311. J Cheminform. 2015 Jan 19;7(Suppl 1 Text mining for chemistry and the CHEMDNER 
track):S6. doi: 10.1186/1758-2946-7-S1-S6. eCollection 2015.

Optimising chemical named entity recognition with pre-processing analytics, 
knowledge-rich features and heuristics.

Batista-Navarro R(1), Rak R(2), Ananiadou S(2).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Text Mining, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 
Princess St, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK ; Department of Computer Science, University 
of the Philippines Diliman, Quezon City, 1101, Philippines.
(2)National Centre for Text Mining, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 
Princess St, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK.

BACKGROUND: The development of robust methods for chemical named entity 
recognition, a challenging natural language processing task, was previously 
hindered by the lack of publicly available, large-scale, gold standard corpora. 
The recent public release of a large chemical entity-annotated corpus as a 
resource for the CHEMDNER track of the Fourth BioCreative Challenge Evaluation 
(BioCreative IV) workshop greatly alleviated this problem and allowed us to 
develop a conditional random fields-based chemical entity recogniser. In order 
to optimise its performance, we introduced customisations in various aspects of 
our solution. These include the selection of specialised pre-processing 
analytics, the incorporation of chemistry knowledge-rich features in the 
training and application of the statistical model, and the addition of 
post-processing rules.
RESULTS: Our evaluation shows that optimal performance is obtained when our 
customisations are integrated into the chemical entity recogniser. When its 
performance is compared with that of state-of-the-art methods, under comparable 
experimental settings, our solution achieves competitive advantage. We also show 
that our recogniser that uses a model trained on the CHEMDNER corpus is suitable 
for recognising names in a wide range of corpora, consistently outperforming two 
popular chemical NER tools.
CONCLUSION: The contributions resulting from this work are two-fold. Firstly, we 
present the details of a chemical entity recognition methodology that has 
demonstrated performance at a competitive, if not superior, level as that of 
state-of-the-art methods. Secondly, the developed suite of solutions has been 
made publicly available as a configurable workflow in the interoperable text 
mining workbench Argo. This allows interested users to conveniently apply and 
evaluate our solutions in the context of other chemical text mining tasks.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-2946-7-S1-S6
PMCID: PMC4331696
PMID: 25810777