390. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2016 Jul 18;16 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):68. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-016-0294-3.

Establishing a baseline for literature mining human genetic variants and their 
relationships to disease cohorts.

Verspoor KM(1), Heo GE(2), Kang KY(2), Song M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Library and Information Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Library and Information Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, 
Korea. min.song@yonsei.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The Variome corpus, a small collection of published articles about 
inherited colorectal cancer, includes annotations of 11 entity types and 13 
relation types related to the curation of the relationship between genetic 
variation and disease. Due to the richness of these annotations, the corpus 
provides a good testbed for evaluation of biomedical literature information 
extraction systems.
METHODS: In this paper, we focus on assessing performance on extracting the 
relations in the corpus, using gold standard entities as a starting point, to 
establish a baseline for extraction of relations important for extraction of 
genetic variant information from the literature. We test the application of the 
Public Knowledge Discovery Engine for Java (PKDE4J) system, a natural language 
processing system designed for information extraction of entities and relations 
in text, on the relation extraction task using this corpus.
RESULTS: For the relations which are attested at least 100 times in the Variome 
corpus, we realise a performance ranging from 0.78-0.84 Precision-weighted 
F-score, depending on the relation. We find that the PKDE4J system adapted 
straightforwardly to the range of relation types represented in the corpus; some 
extensions to the original methodology were required to adapt to the 
multi-relational classification context. The results are competitive with 
state-of-the-art relation extraction performance on more heavily studied 
corpora, although the analysis shows that the Recall of a co-occurrence baseline 
outweighs the benefit of improved Precision for many relations, indicating the 
value of simple semantic constraints on relations.
CONCLUSIONS: This work represents the first attempt to apply relation extraction 
methods to the Variome corpus. The results demonstrate that automated methods 
have good potential to structure the information expressed in the published 
literature related to genetic variants, connecting mutations to genes, diseases, 
and patient cohorts. Further development of such approaches will facilitate more 
efficient biocuration of genetic variant information into structured databases, 
leveraging the knowledge embedded in the vast publication literature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-016-0294-3
PMCID: PMC4959367
PMID: 27454860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]