13. J Biomed Inform. 2018 Dec;88:98-107. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.11.007. Epub 2018 
Nov 13.

An unsupervised and customizable misspelling generator for mining noisy 
health-related text sources.

Sarker A(1), Gonzalez-Hernandez G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, United States. Electronic address: 
abeed@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, United States.

BACKGROUND: Data collection and extraction from noisy text sources such as 
social media typically rely on keyword-based searching/listening. However, 
health-related terms are often misspelled in such noisy text sources due to 
their complex morphology, resulting in the exclusion of relevant data for 
studies. In this paper, we present a customizable data-centric system that 
automatically generates common misspellings for complex health-related terms, 
which can improve the data collection process from noisy text sources.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The spelling variant generator relies on a dense vector 
model learned from large, unlabeled text, which is used to find semantically 
close terms to the original/seed keyword, followed by the filtering of terms 
that are lexically dissimilar beyond a given threshold. The process is executed 
recursively, converging when no new terms similar (lexically and semantically) 
to the seed keyword are found. The weighting of intra-word character sequence 
similarities allows further problem-specific customization of the system.
RESULTS: On a dataset prepared for this study, our system outperforms the 
current state-of-the-art medication name variant generator with best F1-score of 
0.69 and F14-score of 0.78. Extrinsic evaluation of the system on a set of 
cancer-related terms demonstrated an increase of over 67% in retrieval rate from 
Twitter posts when the generated variants are included.
DISCUSSION: Our proposed spelling variant generator has several advantages over 
past spelling variant generators-(i) it is capable of filtering out lexically 
similar but semantically dissimilar terms, (ii) the number of variants generated 
is low, as many low-frequency and ambiguous misspellings are filtered out, and 
(iii) the system is fully automatic, customizable and easily executable. While 
the base system is fully unsupervised, we show how supervision may be employed 
to adjust weights for task-specific customizations.
CONCLUSION: The performance and relative simplicity of our proposed approach 
make it a much-needed spelling variant generation resource for health-related 
text mining from noisy sources. The source code for the system has been made 
publicly available for research.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.11.007
PMCID: PMC6322919
PMID: 30445220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]