620. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2019 Mar 1;34(3):401-407. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfy052.

eResearch in acute kidney injury: a primer for electronic health record 
research.

Joyce EL(1)(2)(3), DeAlmeida DR(4), Fuhrman DY(1)(2)(3)(5), Priyanka P(2)(3), 
Kellum JA(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Center for Critical Care Nephrology, UPMC and University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Clinical Research, Investigation and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness 
(CRISMA) Laboratory, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Health Information Management, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) has a significant impact on patient morbidity and 
mortality as well as overall health care costs. eResearch, which integrates 
information technology and information management to optimize research 
strategies, provides a perfect platform for necessary ongoing AKI research. With 
the recent adoption of a widely accepted definition of AKI and near-universal 
use of electronic health records, eResearch is becoming an important tool in AKI 
research. Conducting eResearch in AKI should ideally be based on a relatively 
uniform methodology. This article is the first of its kind to describe a 
methodology for pursuing eResearch specific to AKI and includes an illustrative 
database example for critically ill patients. We discuss strategies for using 
serum creatinine and urine output in large databases to identify and stage AKI 
and ways to interpolate missing values and validate data. Issues specific to the 
pediatric population include variation in serum creatinine with growth, varied 
severity of illness scoring systems and medication dosage based on weight. Many 
of these same strategies used to optimize AKI eResearch can be applicable to 
real-time AKI alerts with potential integration of additional clinical 
variables.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
ERA-EDTA. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfy052
PMCID: PMC6399481
PMID: 29617846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]