85. Database (Oxford). 2018 Jan 1;2018:bay122. doi: 10.1093/database/bay122.

BioCreative VI Precision Medicine Track system performance is constrained by 
entity recognition and variations in corpus characteristics.

Chen Q(1), Panyam NC(1), Elangovan A(1), Verspoor K(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
Parkville VIC Australia.

Precision medicine aims to provide personalized treatments based on individual 
patient profiles. One critical step towards precision medicine is leveraging 
knowledge derived from biomedical publications-a tremendous literature resource 
presenting the latest scientific discoveries on genes, mutations and diseases. 
Biomedical natural language processing (BioNLP) plays a vital role in supporting 
automation of this process. BioCreative VI Track 4 brings community effort to 
the task of automatically identifying and extracting protein-protein 
interactions (PPi) affected by mutations (PPIm), important in the precision 
medicine context for capturing individual genotype variation related to 
disease.We present the READ-BioMed team's approach to identifying PPIm-related 
publications and to extracting specific PPIm information from those publications 
in the context of the BioCreative VI PPIm track. We observe that current BioNLP 
tools are insufficient to recognise entities for these two tasks; the best 
existing mutation recognition tool achieves only 55% recall in the document 
triage training set, while relation extraction performance is limited by the low 
recall performance of gene entity recognition. We develop the models 
accordingly: for document triage, we develop term lists capturing interactions 
and mutations to complement BioNLP tools, and select effective features via a 
feature contribution study, whereas an ensemble of BioNLP tools is employed for 
relation extraction.Our best document triage model achieves an F-score of 66.77% 
while our best model for relation extraction achieved an F-score of 35.09% over 
the final (updated post-task) test set. Impacting the document triage task, the 
characteristics of mutations are statistically different in the training and 
testing sets. While a vital new direction for biomedical text mining research, 
this early attempt to tackle the problem of identifying genetic variation of 
substantial biological significance highlights the importance of representative 
training data and the cascading impact of tool limitations in a modular system.

DOI: 10.1093/database/bay122
PMCID: PMC6301335
PMID: 30576491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]