143. J Cheminform. 2018 Dec 17;10(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s13321-018-0314-7.

Statistical principle-based approach for gene and protein related object 
recognition.

Lai PT(1)(2), Huang MS(3)(4), Yang TH(1)(2), Hsu WL(5)(6), Tsai RT(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan.
(2)Intelligent Agent Systems Laboratory, Institute of Information Science, 
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Bioinformatics Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Institute of 
Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Computer Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan. hsu@iis.sinica.edu.tw.
(6)Intelligent Agent Systems Laboratory, Institute of Information Science, 
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. hsu@iis.sinica.edu.tw.
(7)Intelligent Information Service Research Laboratory, Department of Computer 
Science and Information Engineering, National Central University, Taoyuan, 
Taiwan. thtsai@csie.ncu.edu.tw.

The large number of chemical and pharmaceutical patents has attracted 
researchers doing biomedical text mining to extract valuable information such as 
chemicals, genes and gene products. To facilitate gene and gene product 
annotations in patents, BioCreative V.5 organized a gene- and protein-related 
object (GPRO) recognition task, in which participants were assigned to identify 
GPRO mentions and determine whether they could be linked to their unique 
biological database records. In this paper, we describe the system constructed 
for this task. Our system is based on two different NER approaches: the 
statistical-principle-based approach (SPBA) and conditional random fields (CRF). 
Therefore, we call our system SPBA-CRF. SPBA is an interpretable 
machine-learning framework for gene mention recognition. The predictions of SPBA 
are used as features for our CRF-based GPRO recognizer. The recognizer was 
developed for identifying chemical mentions in patents, and we adapted it for 
GPRO recognition. In the BioCreative V.5 GPRO recognition task, SPBA-CRF 
obtained an F-score of 73.73% on the evaluation metric of GPRO type 1 and an 
F-score of 78.66% on the evaluation metric of combining GPRO types 1 and 2. Our 
results show that SPBA trained on an external NER dataset can perform reasonably 
well on the partial match evaluation metric. Furthermore, SPBA can significantly 
improve performance of the CRF-based recognizer trained on the GPRO dataset.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-018-0314-7
PMCID: PMC6755615
PMID: 30560325

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential competing interests.