346. Medinfo. 1995;8 Pt 2:1657.

Current trends with natural language processing.

Rassinoux AM(1), Michel PA, Wagner J, Baud R.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland.

Natural Language Processing in the medical domain becomes more and more 
powerful, efficient, and ready to be used in daily practice. The needs for such 
tools are enormous in the medical field, due to the vast amount of written texts 
for medical records. In the authors' point of view, the Electronic Patient 
Record (EPR) is achieved neither with Information Systems of all kinds nor with 
commercially available word processing systems. Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) is one dimension of the EPR, as well as Image Processing and Decision 
Support Systems. Analysis of medical texts to facilitate indexing and retrieval 
is well known. The need for a generation tool is to produce progress notes from 
menu driven systems. The computer systems of tomorrow cannot miss any single 
dimension. Since 1988, we've been developing an NLP system; it is supported by 
the European program AIM (Advanced Informatics in Medicine) within the GALEN and 
HELIOS consortium and the CERS (Commission d'Encouragement รก la Recherche 
Scientifique) in Switzerland. The main directions of development are: a medical 
language analyzer, a language generator, a query processor, and dictionary 
building tools to support the Medical Linguistic Knowledge Base (MLKB). The 
knowledge representation schema is essentially based on Sowa's conceptual 
graphs, and the MLKB is multilingual from its design phase; it currently 
incorporates the English and the French languages; it will also continue using 
German. The goal of this demonstration is to provide evidence of what exists 
today, what will be soon available, and what is planned for the long term. 
Complete sentences will be processed in real time, and the browsing capabilities 
of the MLKB will be exercised. In particular, the following features will be 
presented: Analysis of complete sentences with verbs and relatives, as extracted 
from clinical narratives, with special attention to the method of "proximity 
processing" as developed in our group and the rule based approach to language 
description to resolve the specific surface language problems as well as the 
language independent semantic situations. Comparison of results for English, 
French, and German sentences, showing the commonalities between these languages 
and, therefore, the re-usable features and the language specific aspects. 
Generation of noun phrases in English and French, showing the opportunities for 
translation between these two languages. Application of the analyzer to build a 
knowledge representation of ICD under the form of conceptual graphs and 
presentation of the possibilities of a natural language encoding of diagnosis. 
Strategies for query processing through a sample of abdominal ultrasonography 
reports, which have been analyzed and stored under the form of conceptual 
graphs. Feeding in and browsing of the Medical Linguistic Knowledge Base and 
other Dictionary Building Tools, using the perspective of an international 
initiative to converge towards a multilingual universal solution, valid for the 
medical domain. The demonstration platform is Microsoft Windows 4 on a PC, with 
Microsoft Visual Basic as the GUI and Quintus Prolog as NLP tools language. The 
same programs were originally developed for Unix-based workstations and are 
available on multiple platforms under Motif and X11. .

PMID: 8591530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]