614. Online J Public Health Inform. 2017 Dec 31;9(3):e195. doi: 
10.5210/ojphi.v9i3.8129. eCollection 2017.

A State-wide Health IT Infrastructure for Population Health: Building a 
Community-wide Electronic Platform for Maryland's All-Payer Global Budget.

Hatef E(1), Kharrazi H(1), VanBaak E(2), Falcone M(2), Ferris L(2), Mertz K(2), 
Perman C(3), Bauman A(3), Lasser EC(1), Weiner JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Population Health IT, Department of Health Policy and Management, 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD.
(2)Chesapeake Regional Information System for our Patients (CRISP), Columbia, 
Maryland.
(3)Office of Population Health Improvement, Maryland Department of Health, 
Baltimore, MD.

Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has been preparing for alignment of its 
population health initiatives with Maryland's unique All-Payer hospital global 
budget program. In order to operationalize population health initiatives, it is 
required to identify a starter set of measures addressing community level health 
interventions and to collect interoperable data for those measures. The broad 
adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) with ongoing data collection on 
almost all patients in the state, combined with hospital participation in health 
information exchange (HIE) initiatives, provides an unprecedented opportunity 
for near real-time assessment of the health of the communities. MDH's EHR-based 
monitoring complements, and perhaps replaces, ad-hoc assessments based on 
limited surveys, billing, and other administrative data. This article explores 
the potential expansion of health IT capacity as a method to improve population 
health across Maryland. First, we propose a progression plan for four selected 
community-wide population health measures: body mass index, blood pressure, 
smoking status, and falls-related injuries. We then present an assessment of the 
current and near real-time availability of digital data in Maryland including 
the geographic granularity on which each measure can be assessed statewide. 
Finally, we provide general recommendations to improve interoperable data 
collection for selected measures over time via the Maryland HIE. This paper is 
intended to serve as a high level guiding framework for communities across the 
US that are undergoing healthcare transformation toward integrated models of 
care using universal interoperable EHRs.

DOI: 10.5210/ojphi.v9i3.8129
PMCID: PMC5790428
PMID: 29403574

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: No Competing Interests.