185. Methods Inf Med. 2015;54(1):24-31. doi: 10.3414/ME13-02-0025. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Bridging data models and terminologies to support adverse drug event reporting 
using EHR data.

Declerck G(1), Hussain S, Daniel C, Yuksel M, Laleci GB, Twagirumukiza M, 
Jaulent MC.

Author information:
(1)Gunnar Declerck, Centre de recherche des Cordeliers, 15 rue de l'école de 
médecine, 75006 Paris, France, E-mail: gunnar.declerck@upmc.fr.

INTRODUCTION: This article is part of the Focus Theme of METHODs of Information 
in Medicine on "Managing Interoperability and Complexity in Health Systems".
BACKGROUND: SALUS project aims at building an interoperability platform and a 
dedicated toolkit to enable secondary use of electronic health records (EHR) 
data for post marketing drug surveillance. An important component of this 
toolkit is a drug-related adverse events (AE) reporting system designed to 
facilitate and accelerate the reporting process using automatic prepopulation 
mechanisms.
OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate SALUS approach for establishing syntactic and semantic 
interoperability for AE reporting.
METHOD: Standard (e.g. HL7 CDA-CCD) and proprietary EHR data models are mapped 
to the E2B(R2) data model via SALUS Common Information Model. Terminology 
mapping and terminology reasoning services are designed to ensure the automatic 
conversion of source EHR terminologies (e.g. ICD-9-CM, ICD-10, LOINC or 
SNOMED-CT) to the target terminology MedDRA which is expected in AE reporting 
forms. A validated set of terminology mappings is used to ensure the reliability 
of the reasoning mechanisms.
RESULTS: The percentage of data elements of a standard E2B report that can be 
completed automatically has been estimated for two pilot sites. In the best 
scenario (i.e. the available fields in the EHR have actually been filled), only 
36% (pilot site 1) and 38% (pilot site 2) of E2B data elements remain to be 
filled manually. In addition, most of these data elements shall not be filled in 
each report.
CONCLUSION: SALUS platform's interoperability solutions enable partial 
automation of the AE reporting process, which could contribute to improve 
current spontaneous reporting practices and reduce under-reporting, which is 
currently one major obstacle in the process of acquisition of pharmacovigilance 
data.

DOI: 10.3414/ME13-02-0025
PMID: 25487120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]