539. J Pathol Inform. 2018 Dec 24;9:47. doi: 10.4103/jpi.jpi_38_18. eCollection 2018.

Integration of Cancer Registry Data into the Text Information Extraction System: 
Leveraging the Structured Data Import Tool.

Linkov F(1)(2), Silverstein JC(2), Davis M(2), Crocker B(3), Hao D(2), Schneider 
A(4), Schwenk M(2), Winters S(4), Zelnis J(2), Lee AV(5), Becich MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)UPMC Hillman Cancer Center Information Services, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(4)UPMC Network Cancer Registry, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, 
The Institute for Precision Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND: Cancer registries in the US collect timely and 
systematic data on new cancer cases, extent of disease, staging, biomarker 
status, treatment, survival, and mortality of cancer cases. Existing 
methodologies for accessing local cancer registry data for research are 
time-consuming and often rely on the manual merging of data by staff registrars. 
In addition, existing registries do not provide direct access to these data nor 
do they routinely provide linkage to discrete electronic health record (EHR) 
data, reports, or imaging data. Automation of such linkage can provide an 
impressive data resource and make valuable data available for translational 
cancer research.
METHODS: The UPMC Network Cancer Registry collects highly structured, 
longitudinal data on all reportable cancer patients, from the point of the 
diagnosis throughout treatment and follow-up/outcomes. Using commercial registry 
software, we collect data in compliance with standards governed by the North 
American Association of Central Cancer Registries. This standardization ensures 
that the data are highly structured with standard coding and collection methods, 
which support data exchange among central cancer registries and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention.
RESULTS: At the UPMC Hillman Cancer Center and University of Pittsburgh, we 
explored the feasibility of linking this well-curated, structured cancer 
registry data with unstructured text (i.e., pathology and radiology reports), 
using the Text Information Extraction System (TIES). We used the TIES platform 
to integrate breast cancer cases from the UPMC Network Cancer Registry system 
and then combine these data with other EHR data as a pilot use case that can be 
replicated for other cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: As a result of this integration, we now have a single searchable 
repository of information for breast cancer patients from the UPMC registry, 
combined with their pathology and radiology reports. The system that we 
developed is easily scalable to other health systems and cancer centers.

DOI: 10.4103/jpi.jpi_38_18
PMCID: PMC6319041
PMID: 30662793

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.