611. Sports Health. 2019 Sep/Oct;11(5):440-445. doi: 10.1177/1941738119854759. Epub 
2019 Jul 2.

Lessons on Data Collection and Curation From the NFL Injury Surveillance 
Program.

Dreyer NA(1), Mack CD(2), Anderson RB(3)(4), Wojtys EM(5), Hershman EB(6), Sills 
A(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Evidence Generation, Real-World & Analytic Solutions, 
IQVIA, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(2)Center for Advanced Evidence Generation, Real-World & Analytic Solutions, 
IQVIA, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.
(3)Foot and Ankle Institute, OrthoCarolina, Charlotte, North Carolina.
(4)Sports Foot/Ankle, Titletown Sports Medicine, Green Bay, Wisconsin.
(5)MedSport, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Lenox Hill Hospital, North Shore-LIJ 
Orthopaedic Institute, North Shore-LIJ Healthcare System, New York, New York.
(7)National Football League, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: "Research-ready" evidence platforms that link sports data with 
anonymized electronic health records (EHRs) or other data are important tools 
for evaluating injury occurrence in response to changes in games, training, 
rules, and other factors. While there is agreement that high-quality data are 
essential, there is little evidence to guide data curation.
HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesized that an EHR used in the course of clinical care and 
curated for research readiness can provide a robust evidence platform. Our 
purpose was to describe the data curation used for active injury surveillance by 
the National Football League (NFL).
STUDY DESIGN: Dynamic cohort study.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level 2.
METHODS: Players provide informed consent for research activities through the 
collective bargaining process. A league-wide EHR is used to record injuries that 
come to the attention of the teams' athletic trainers and physicians, NFL 
medical spotters, or unaffiliated neurotrauma consultants. Information about 
football activities and injuries are linkable by player, setting, and event to 
other sports-related data, including game statistics and game-day stadium 
quality measures, using a unique player identification designed to protect 
player privacy. Ongoing data curation is used to review data completeness and 
accuracy and is adjusted over time in response to findings.
RESULTS: The core data curation activities include monthly injury summaries to 
team staff, queries to resolve incomplete reporting, and periodic external 
checks. Experiences derived from producing more than 100 reports per year on 
diverse topics are used to update coding training and related guidance documents 
in response to missing data or inconsistent coding that is observed. Roughly 20% 
more injuries were recorded for the same "reportable" injuries after switching 
from targeted reporting to an EHR.
CONCLUSION: Research-ready databases need systematic curation for quality and 
completeness, along with related action plans. More injuries were reported 
through EHR than through targeted reporting.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Evidence-driven decision-making thrives on reliable data 
fine-tuned through systematic use, review, and ongoing adjustments to the 
curation process.

DOI: 10.1177/1941738119854759
PMCID: PMC6745812
PMID: 31265352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following authors declared potential 
conflicts of interest: N.A.D. and C.D.M. are employed by IQVIA; R.B.A. received 
consulting fees from Amniox, Artelon, Arthrex, Bioventus, DJO, Wright Medical, 
and Zimmer Biomet, and royalties from Arthrex, Biomet, Wright Medical, and 
Zimmer Biomet; E.M.W. received travel payments from the National Football League 
(NFL) and AOSSM and payments from the NFL and NIAMS/KAI, he also serves as 
editor in chief for Sports Health; E.B.H. received consulting fees and royalties 
from Active Implants Corp and royalties from Zimmer Biomet; and A.S. is employed 
by the NFL. This research program was funded by the NFL and approved by the 
National Football League Players Association under a collectively bargained 
agreement pertaining to NFL player research. The authors assert that these 
results are presented clearly, honestly, and without fabrication, falsification, 
or inappropriate data manipulation.