249. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 20;12(12):e0189663. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189663. 
eCollection 2017.

eGARD: Extracting associations between genomic anomalies and drug responses from 
text.

Mahmood ASMA(1), Rao S(2), McGarvey P(2)(3), Wu C(1)(3)(4), Madhavan S(2)(5), 
Vijay-Shanker K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Delaware, 
Newark, Delaware, United States of America.
(2)Innovation Center For Biomedical Informatics, Georgetown University, 
Washington D.C, United States of America.
(3)Protein Information Resource, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington D.C, United States of America.
(4)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware, 
Newark, Delaware, United States of America.
(5)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, 
Washington D.C, United States of America.

Tumor molecular profiling plays an integral role in identifying genomic 
anomalies which may help in personalizing cancer treatments, improving patient 
outcomes and minimizing risks associated with different therapies. However, 
critical information regarding the evidence of clinical utility of such 
anomalies is largely buried in biomedical literature. It is becoming prohibitive 
for biocurators, clinical researchers and oncologists to keep up with the 
rapidly growing volume and breadth of information, especially those that 
describe therapeutic implications of biomarkers and therefore relevant for 
treatment selection. In an effort to improve and speed up the process of 
manually reviewing and extracting relevant information from literature, we have 
developed a natural language processing (NLP)-based text mining (TM) system 
called eGARD (extracting Genomic Anomalies association with Response to Drugs). 
This system relies on the syntactic nature of sentences coupled with various 
textual features to extract relations between genomic anomalies and drug 
response from MEDLINE abstracts. Our system achieved high precision, recall and 
F-measure of up to 0.95, 0.86 and 0.90, respectively, on annotated evaluation 
datasets created in-house and obtained externally from PharmGKB. Additionally, 
the system extracted information that helps determine the confidence level of 
extraction to support prioritization of curation. Such a system will enable 
clinical researchers to explore the use of published markers to stratify 
patients upfront for 'best-fit' therapies and readily generate hypotheses for 
new clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189663
PMCID: PMC5738129
PMID: 29261751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.