295. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2014 Nov;117(2):277-91. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.07.010. Epub 2014 Aug 10.

Gquest: modeling patient questionnaires and administering them through a mobile 
platform application.

Lanzola G(1), Ginardi MG(2), Mazzanti A(3), Quaglini S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: giordano.lanzola@unipv.it.
(2)Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Pavia, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Foundation "S. Maugeri", Pavia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The use of surveys is becoming popular in the health care industry 
for acquiring information useful to the accomplishment of several studies. 
Besides their exploitation on a large scale for conducting epidemiological 
studies, surveys are being increasingly carried out on a narrower perspective 
through the administration of questionnaires aimed at assessing the quality of 
life perceived by patients or their clinical status during mid- or long-term 
treatments. This is useful for managing resources or optimizing and 
individualizing treatments.
OBJECTIVES: This paper describes Gquest, a platform for modeling, generating and 
administering questionnaires through mobile devices such as smartphones or 
tablets. Gquest was motivated by the need of administering questionnaires during 
home treatments, albeit its applicability is rather general. The main 
requirement was to have a very simple, clean and easy to use platform able to 
support (a) physicians in the design and delivery of questionnaires and (b) 
outpatients in sending self-recorded outcomes to the clinical staff.
METHODS: Gquest has two basic components. The first one is a model devised for 
representing questionnaires which is extremely flexible. It allows the 
generation of questions and answers of different types, supports adaptivity in 
the dialog with the user and enforces simple consistency rules for checking his 
input. The second component is an application able to run instances of those 
questionnaires. It downloads questionnaires over the air in terms of XML files 
from a server and stores them locally into the mobile repository. Questionnaires 
become then available to the user, who in our case is a patient or one of his 
relatives. The user can select which one to fill-in, according to his needs 
and/or the specific treatment protocol. The selected questionnaire may be 
filled-in all at once or be completed in subsequent steps over time since any 
input provided is persisted on a local database. Finally, when a questionnaire 
is closed all the answers are transparently synchronized to a server for further 
evaluation or statistical purposes.
RESULTS: The platform has been exploited and tested in two medical domains where 
questionnaires have very different purposes; a quality of life pilot survey 
involving patients with atrial fibrillation within the EU-funded project 
MobiGuide, and an investigation of the users' needs during the requirements 
elicitation phase of a telemedicine project for the safe discharge of fragile 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Gquest proved to be a suitable tool for dealing with a wide variety 
of question types and has been positively accepted by the patients enrolled in 
the pilot study.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.07.010
PMID: 25154645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]