349. Bioinformatics. 2008 Sep 1;24(17):1935-41. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn318. 
Epub 2008 Jul 1.

PuReD-MCL: a graph-based PubMed document clustering methodology.

Theodosiou T(1), Darzentas N, Angelis L, Ouzounis CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessalonica, P.O. Box 
54124, Thessalonica, Greece. theodos@csd.auth.gr

MOTIVATION: Biomedical literature is the principal repository of biomedical 
knowledge, with PubMed being the most complete database collecting, organizing 
and analyzing such textual knowledge. There are numerous efforts that attempt to 
exploit this information by using text mining and machine learning techniques. 
We developed a novel approach, called PuReD-MCL (Pubmed Related Documents-MCL), 
which is based on the graph clustering algorithm MCL and relevant resources from 
PubMed.
METHODS: PuReD-MCL avoids using natural language processing (NLP) techniques 
directly; instead, it takes advantage of existing resources, available from 
PubMed. PuReD-MCL then clusters documents efficiently using the MCL graph 
clustering algorithm, which is based on graph flow simulation. This process 
allows users to analyse the results by highlighting important clues, and finally 
to visualize the clusters and all relevant information using an interactive 
graph layout algorithm, for instance BioLayout Express 3D.
RESULTS: The methodology was applied to two different datasets, previously used 
for the validation of the document clustering tool TextQuest. The first dataset 
involves the organisms Escherichia coli and yeast, whereas the second is related 
to Drosophila development. PuReD-MCL successfully reproduces the annotated 
results obtained from TextQuest, while at the same time provides additional 
insights into the clusters and the corresponding documents.
AVAILABILITY: Source code in perl and R are available from 
http://tartara.csd.auth.gr/~theodos/

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn318
PMID: 18593717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]