538. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2018 May 30;18(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12911-018-0614-x.

Implementation of a patient-facing genomic test report in the electronic health 
record using a web-application interface.

Williams MS(1), Kern MS(2), Lerch VR(3), Billet J(3), Williams JL(4), Moore 
GJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, 100 North Academy Avenue, Danville, 
PA, USA. mswilliams1@geisinger.edu.
(2)Center for Pharmacy Innovation and Outcomes, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(3)Institute for Advanced Application, Geisinger, Danville, PA, USA.
(4)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, 100 North Academy Avenue, Danville, 
PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomic medicine is emerging into clinical care. Communication of 
genetic laboratory results to patients and providers is hampered by the complex 
technical nature of the laboratory reports. This can lead to confusion and 
misinterpretation of the results resulting in inappropriate care. Patients 
usually do not receive a copy of the report leading to further opportunities for 
miscommunication. To address these problems, interpretive reports were created 
using input from the intended end users, patients and providers. This paper 
describes the technical development and deployment of the first patient-facing 
genomic test report (PGR) within an electronic health record (EHR) ecosystem 
using a locally developed standards-based web-application interface.
METHODS: A patient-facing genomic test report with a companion provider report 
was configured for implementation within the EHR using a locally developed 
software platform, COMPASS™. COMPASS™ is designed to manage secure data 
exchange, as well as patient and provider access to patient reported data 
capture and clinical display tools. COMPASS™ is built using a Software as a 
Service (SaaS) approach which exposes an API that apps can interact with.
RESULTS: An authoring tool was developed that allowed creation of 
patient-specific PGRs and the accompanying provider reports. These were 
converted to a format that allowed them to be presented in the patient portal 
and EHR respectively using the existing COMPASS™ interface thus allowing 
patients, caregivers and providers access to individual reports designed for the 
intended end user.
CONCLUSIONS: The PGR as developed was shown to enhance patient and provider 
communication around genomic results. It is built on current standards but is 
designed to support integration with other tools and be compatible with emerging 
opportunities such as SMART on FHIR. This approach could be used to support 
genomic return of results as the tool is scalable and generalizable.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-018-0614-x
PMCID: PMC5975475
PMID: 29843696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Participants involved in the development of the tool provided written consent to 
participate. This study was approved by the Geisinger Institutional Review Board 
Registration # 00008345. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.