570. JMIR Med Inform. 2018 Feb 1;6(1):e8. doi: 10.2196/medinform.8662.

Automated Information Extraction on Treatment and Prognosis for Non-Small Cell 
Lung Cancer Radiotherapy Patients: Clinical Study.

Zheng S(1), Jabbour SK(2), O'Reilly SE(3), Lu JJ(4), Dong L(5), Ding L(5), Xiao 
Y(3), Yue N(2), Wang F(#)(6)(7), Zou W(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United 
States.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New 
Brunswick, NJ, United States.
(3)Penn Medicine, Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(4)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, United States.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Hospital, Changchun, China.
(6)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
NY, United States.
(7)Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, 
United States.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: In outcome studies of oncology patients undergoing radiation, 
researchers extract valuable information from medical records generated before, 
during, and after radiotherapy visits, such as survival data, toxicities, and 
complications. Clinical studies rely heavily on these data to correlate the 
treatment regimen with the prognosis to develop evidence-based radiation therapy 
paradigms. These data are available mainly in forms of narrative texts or table 
formats with heterogeneous vocabularies. Manual extraction of the related 
information from these data can be time consuming and labor intensive, which is 
not ideal for large studies.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to adapt the interactive information 
extraction platform Information and Data Extraction using Adaptive Learning 
(IDEAL-X) to extract treatment and prognosis data for patients with locally 
advanced or inoperable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: We transformed patient treatment and prognosis documents into 
normalized structured forms using the IDEAL-X system for easy data navigation. 
The adaptive learning and user-customized controlled toxicity vocabularies were 
applied to extract categorized treatment and prognosis data, so as to generate 
structured output.
RESULTS: In total, we extracted data from 261 treatment and prognosis documents 
relating to 50 patients, with overall precision and recall more than 93% and 
83%, respectively. For toxicity information extractions, which are important to 
study patient posttreatment side effects and quality of life, the precision and 
recall achieved 95.7% and 94.5% respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The IDEAL-X system is capable of extracting study data regarding 
NSCLC chemoradiation patients with significant accuracy and effectiveness, and 
therefore can be used in large-scale radiotherapy clinical data studies.

©Shuai Zheng, Salma K Jabbour, Shannon E O'Reilly, James J Lu, Lihua Dong, 
Lijuan Ding, Ying Xiao, Ning Yue, Fusheng Wang, Wei Zou. Originally published in 
JMIR Medical Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 01.02.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.8662
PMCID: PMC5814605
PMID: 29391345

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.