239. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2017 Aug 22;17(1):127. doi: 10.1186/s12911-017-0519-0.

Empirical advances with text mining of electronic health records.

Delespierre T(1)(2), Denormandie P(3), Bar-Hen A(4), Josseran L(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut du Bien Vieillir Korian, 21-25 rue Balzac, 75008, Paris, France. 
tiba.baroukh@gmail.com.
(2)Research lab: EA 4047, UFR des Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil, UVSQ 
Université Paris-Saclay, 2 Avenue de la Source de la Bièvre, Montigny le 
Bretonneux, 78180, France. tiba.baroukh@gmail.com.
(3)MNH Group, 185 rue de Bercy, 75012, Paris, France.
(4)UFR de Mathématiques et Informatique, Université de Paris Descartes, 45 rue 
des Saints-Pères, Paris, 75006, France.
(5)Research lab: EA 4047, UFR des Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil, UVSQ 
Université Paris-Saclay, 2 Avenue de la Source de la Bièvre, Montigny le 
Bretonneux, 78180, France.

BACKGROUND: Korian is a private group specializing in medical accommodations for 
elderly and dependent people. A professional data warehouse (DWH) established in 
2010 hosts all of the residents' data. Inside this information system (IS), 
clinical narratives (CNs) were used only by medical staff as a residents' care 
linking tool. The objective of this study was to show that, through qualitative 
and quantitative textual analysis of a relatively small physiotherapy and 
well-defined CN sample, it was possible to build a physiotherapy corpus and, 
through this process, generate a new body of knowledge by adding relevant 
information to describe the residents' care and lives.
METHODS: Meaningful words were extracted through Standard Query Language (SQL) 
with the LIKE function and wildcards to perform pattern matching, followed by 
text mining and a word cloud using R® packages. Another step involved principal 
components and multiple correspondence analyses, plus clustering on the same 
residents' sample as well as on other health data using a health model measuring 
the residents' care level needs.
RESULTS: By combining these techniques, physiotherapy treatments could be 
characterized by a list of constructed keywords, and the residents' health 
characteristics were built. Feeding defects or health outlier groups could be 
detected, physiotherapy residents' data and their health data were matched, and 
differences in health situations showed qualitative and quantitative differences 
in physiotherapy narratives.
CONCLUSIONS: This textual experiment using a textual process in two stages 
showed that text mining and data mining techniques provide convenient tools to 
improve residents' health and quality of care by adding new, simple, useable 
data to the electronic health record (EHR). When used with a normalized 
physiotherapy problem list, text mining through information extraction (IE), 
named entity recognition (NER) and data mining (DM) can provide a real advantage 
to describe health care, adding new medical material and helping to integrate 
the EHR system into the health staff work environment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-017-0519-0
PMCID: PMC5568397
PMID: 28830417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
use of this database in the frame of epidemiological studies has been authorized 
by the French National Commission for Data protection and Liberties (CNIL). The 
Institut du Bien Vieillir filed a declaration of conformity to a baseline 
methodology which received in March 2017 an agreement number: 2.041.050, in 
accordance with the Act n°78–17 of 6 January 1978 on Data Processing, Data Files 
and Individual Liberties. All residents are informed at their NH entry about 
their EHR and their right to oppose its use. While the primary purpose of this 
medical research was to generate new knowledge, this goal didn’t take precedence 
over the rights and interests of the NH residents. All the new generated 
information was extracted from already existing data and was de-identified and 
anonymized when necessary to protect their health and rights. There were no 
images and no identifying details on individuals reported within this manuscript 
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors do not 
have any financial or non-financial competing interests to report. Funding to 
support TD’s work is reported above. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.