551. Transfusion. 2018 Nov;58(11):2490-2494. doi: 10.1111/trf.14872. Epub 2018 Sep 
19.

Anti-D from alloimmunization versus RhIG: detective work in the blood bank and 
transfusion medicine services.

Berry D(1), DiGuardo M(1), Mo YD(1), Wehrli G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, Virginia.

BACKGROUND: The blood bank and transfusion medicine services (BBTMS) engages 
with electronic health records (EHRs), clinicians, and outside hospitals (OHs) 
to obtain comprehensive patient history to optimize care. Detection of anti-D in 
a pregnant patient underscores this work. Differentiating passive anti-D due to 
RhIG administration versus alloanti-D affects clinical decision making. The 
objectives of this study were to identify the required steps, barriers, and 
outcomes of anti-D investigations in obstetric patients.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: This retrospective case series reviewed nine pregnant 
patients over 24 months, for whom anti-D was identified with no reported RhIG 
history. Six steps were performed to ascertain anti-D history: 1) review the 
on-site EHR; 2) contact the on-site obstetrician, 3) review history from the 
automatic health information exchange (HIE) with OHs using the same EHR 
platform, 4) request information from OHs with a shared EHR platform and without 
automatic HIE, 5) contact the OH BBTMS, and 6) communicate with the outside 
ambulatory practice (OAP).
RESULTS: The investigations revealed that eight of nine patients received RhIG 
before their presentation. Five patients received RhIG at an OH's emergency 
department and three at an OAP. One patient's history remained unknown after 
initial investigations; however, a subsequent sample unveiled a confounding 
alloantibody.
CONCLUSION: In the absence of a national HIE, continuity of care suffers through 
omission of critical information. Strategies to avoid confusing passive anti-D 
and alloanti-D include expanding HIE capabilities and use of patient 
identification cards with critical BBTMS information to include RhIG 
administration dates.

© 2018 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.14872
PMID: 30230552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]