483. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2020 Jul 8:ocaa083. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa083. Online 
ahead of print.

Piloting a model-to-data approach to enable predictive analytics in health care 
through patient mortality prediction.

Bergquist T(1), Yan Y(2), Schaffter T(3), Yu T(3), Pejaver V(1), Hammarlund 
N(1), Prosser J(4), Guinney J(1)(3), Mooney S(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Molecular Engineering and Sciences Institute, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Institute for Translational Health Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The development of predictive models for clinical application 
requires the availability of electronic health record (EHR) data, which is 
complicated by patient privacy concerns. We showcase the "Model to Data" (MTD) 
approach as a new mechanism to make private clinical data available for the 
development of predictive models. Under this framework, we eliminate 
researchers' direct interaction with patient data by delivering containerized 
models to the EHR data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We operationalize the MTD framework using the Synapse 
collaboration platform and an on-premises secure computing environment at the 
University of Washington hosting EHR data. Containerized mortality prediction 
models developed by a model developer, were delivered to the University of 
Washington via Synapse, where the models were trained and evaluated. Model 
performance metrics were returned to the model developer.
RESULTS: The model developer was able to develop 3 mortality prediction models 
under the MTD framework using simple demographic features (area under the 
receiver-operating characteristic curve [AUROC], 0.693), demographics and 5 
common chronic diseases (AUROC, 0.861), and the 1000 most common features from 
the EHR's condition/procedure/drug domains (AUROC, 0.921).
DISCUSSION: We demonstrate the feasibility of the MTD framework to facilitate 
the development of predictive models on private EHR data, enabled by common data 
models and containerization software. We identify challenges that both the model 
developer and the health system information technology group encountered and 
propose future efforts to improve implementation.
CONCLUSIONS: The MTD framework lowers the barrier of access to EHR data and can 
accelerate the development and evaluation of clinical prediction models.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa083
PMID: 32638010