536. Int J Med Inform. 2008 May;77(5):354-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.07.004. 
Epub 2007 Sep 10.

Literature-based concept profiles for gene annotation: the issue of weighting.

Jelier R(1), Schuemie MJ, Roes PJ, van Mulligen EM, Kors JA.

Author information:
(1)Erasmus University Medical Centre, Department of Medical Informatics, P.O. 
Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. r.jelier@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Text-mining has been used to link biomedical concepts, such as genes 
or biological processes, to each other for annotation purposes or the generation 
of new hypotheses. To relate two concepts to each other several authors have 
used the vector space model, as vectors can be compared efficiently and 
transparently. Using this model, a concept is characterized by a list of 
associated concepts, together with weights that indicate the strength of the 
association. The associated concepts in the vectors and their weights are 
derived from a set of documents linked to the concept of interest. An important 
issue with this approach is the determination of the weights of the associated 
concepts. Various schemes have been proposed to determine these weights, but no 
comparative studies of the different approaches are available. Here we compare 
several weighting approaches in a large scale classification experiment.
METHODS: Three different techniques were evaluated: (1) weighting based on 
averaging, an empirical approach; (2) the log likelihood ratio, a test-based 
measure; (3) the uncertainty coefficient, an information-theory based measure. 
The weighting schemes were applied in a system that annotates genes with Gene 
Ontology codes. As the gold standard for our study we used the annotations 
provided by the Gene Ontology Annotation project. Classification performance was 
evaluated by means of the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve using 
the area under the curve (AUC) as the measure of performance.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: All methods performed well with median AUC scores 
greater than 0.84, and scored considerably higher than a binary approach without 
any weighting. Especially for the more specific Gene Ontology codes excellent 
performance was observed. The differences between the methods were small when 
considering the whole experiment. However, the number of documents that were 
linked to a concept proved to be an important variable. When larger amounts of 
texts were available for the generation of the concepts' vectors, the 
performance of the methods diverged considerably, with the uncertainty 
coefficient then outperforming the two other methods.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.07.004
PMID: 17827057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]