641. JAMIA Open. 2019 Sep 20;2(4):423-428. doi: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz038. eCollection 
2019 Dec.

Challenges to electronic clinical quality measurement using third-party 
platforms in primary care practices: the healthy hearts in the heartland 
experience.

Ahmad FS(1)(2)(3), Rasmussen LV(3), Persell SD(4)(5), Richardson JE(6), Liss 
DT(4)(5), Kenly P(2), Chung I(2), French DD(7)(8)(9), Walunas TL(2)(4), 
Schriever A(10), Kho AN(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)The Center for Health Information Partnerships (CHiP), Institute of Public 
Health & Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(3)Division of Health and Biomedical Informatics, Department of Preventive 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(5)The Center for Primary Care Innovation, Institute of Public Health & 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(6)RTI International, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(8)Center for Healthcare Studies, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(9)Veterans Affairs Health Services Research and Development Service, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(10)Apertiva, Inc, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Third-party platforms have emerged to support small primary care practices for 
calculating and reporting electronic clinical quality measures (eCQM) for 
federal programs like The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 
(MACRA) and Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS). Yet little is known 
about the capabilities and limitations of electronic health record systems 
(EHRs) to enable data access for these programs. We connected 116 small- to 
medium-sized practices with seven different EHRs to popHealth, an open-source 
eCQM platform. We identified the prevalence of following problems with eCQM data 
for data extraction in seven different EHRs: (1) Lack of coded data in five of 
seven; (2) Incorrectly categorized data in four of seven; (3) Isosemantic data 
(data within the incorrect context) in four of seven; (4) Coding that could not 
be directly evaluated in six of seven; (5) Errors in date assignment and labeled 
as historical values in five of seven; and (6) Inadequate data to assign the 
correct code in two of seven. We recommend specific enhancements to EHR systems 
that can promote effective eCQM implementation and reporting to MACRA and MIPS.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz038
PMCID: PMC6994020
PMID: 32025638