638. Int J Risk Saf Med. 2015;27 Suppl 1:S108-9. doi: 10.3233/JRS-150711.

Cognitive IT-systems for big data analysis in medicine.

Isakova J.

BACKGROUND: Rapid development of medicine requires regular update of clinical 
data evidence. This task accomplishment requires participation of numerous 
specialists in evidence-based medicine, who are proficient in various 
statistical methods and can work with big data analysis tools in biomedical 
sciences. This, in turn, requires significant time and other resources. Today, 
at the peak of IT development, cognitive systems in the field of medicine with 
special technologies of data collection and analysis, is the start of a new 
trend.
OBJECTIVE: The development of cognitive IT system for drug prescription with the 
potential to analyze automatically the information about drugs effectiveness and 
safety on the basis of clinical practice experience and scientific data 
according to evidence levels and patients' personal characteristics.
METHODS: The cognitive system was developed with the use of United Medical 
Knowledge Base (UMKB). UMKB is a semantic network of medical knowledge, which is 
structured according to the medical ontologies and the theory of fuzzy logic. 
UMKB is being filled simultaneously in all the areas of medicine. From one side 
it is filled by means of the linguistic module analyzing medical texts, from the 
second side - by academic institutions, from the third side - by the cognitive 
IT systems with the data from electronic health records (EHRs). Native language 
of UMKB is Russian. It is designed primarily for use in the Russian clinical 
practice. However the platform for filling knowledge is multilingual and 
supports any other languages. This means that the practice of world schools may 
also be integrated and used in UMKB. The peculiarity lies in the fact that UMKB 
is presented as a semantic network where biomedical knowledge are structured 
according to certain medical ontologies (special rules of information storage 
that 𠄼carries𠄽 data: phenomena, processes, simple and complex concepts in 
medicine, - in the form of interrelated objects). The keystone underlying UMKB 
is the model of medical knowledge representation, which is able to describe any 
area of medicine. With the help of this model one can accurately simulate risk 
factors, etiology, and pathogenesis of a disease (probability, time of 
development and the sequence of pathological signs at each stage of a disease). 
While describing pathological and compensatory mechanisms the database provides 
an opportunity to clarify a lot of conditions that affect this mechanism. It is 
also simple to simulate structural and functional features of the concept and 
its relationships (for example, compensatory mechanisms, reflexes, complex 
anatomical structures, all the features of variant anatomy and other 
characteristics), which form reactivity and resistance of the organism. All this 
is very important for cognitive IT systems concerning personalized and 
evidence-based medicine. When describing medical knowledge there are often 
situations of uncertainty, lack of sufficiently complete and accurate data on 
the subject area, poorly understood phenomena, conflicting theories or imprecise 
concepts. Semantic network of UMKB presents complex relationships among medical 
concepts characterized by the following features: type and direction of 
relationship, its weight and value, accuracy and personalization of the weight 
or value of relationship, date of actualization. Multifactorial influence on the 
weight or value of relationship, a lot of elementary and intermediate traits 
that influence weight, the moment of actualization are supported to formalize. 
United Medical Knowledge Base is a large-scale project, its main goal is to 
increase the quality and duration of life through personalized care based on 
evidence that can only be achieved by combining medical big data from various 
fields of biomedical sciences.
RESULTS: On the basis of UMKB a prototype of the cognitive IT system PharmExpert 
with analytical potential was developed. PharmExpert is a clinical decision 
support system for drug prescribing, which is integrated into medical 
information system at health institutions and analyzes electronic health records 
(EHRs) in any format of the background mode, correcting drug therapy according 
to personal patient's profile and data about compatibility of the drugs. The 
system has a very important function - self-learning that will help it to absorb 
a huge mountain of medical data from routine clinical practice in the nearest 
future. Now it works on the basis of data from UMKB, handbooks in pharmacology, 
summaries of medical products characteristics (SmPCs), available reviews of 
scientific literature and clinical guidelines on drugs interactions and 
compatibility. In the short term, at the stage of clinical testing, PharmExpert 
memorizing all the cases of clinical experience and the reaction of the 
physicians (accepting or ignoring the recommendations of the system), will be 
able to realize self-learning function by rebuilding ties and remodeling 
knowledge of the semantic network according to clinical data and generating the 
best standards of drug therapy taking into account personal characteristics of 
the patient and levels of data evidence. Working in the background mode is one 
of the most important advantages of the system. The physician is not asked to 
enter any additional data beyond that the specialist enters into the EHR on an 
everyday basis. Now PharmExpert is installed in the medical information systems 
of the range of clinical centers in the Russian Federation.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a prototype of cognitive IT system for drug 
prescription with the potential to analyze automatically the information about 
drugs effectiveness and safety on the basis of clinical practice experience and 
scientific data according to evidence levels and patients' personal 
characteristics. The system is based on the structured semantic network of 
medical knowledge from UMKB.

DOI: 10.3233/JRS-150711
PMID: 26639685