502. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Feb 28;7:97. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-97.

The Ontology Lookup Service, a lightweight cross-platform tool for controlled 
vocabulary queries.

Côté RG(1), Jones P, Apweiler R, Hermjakob H.

Author information:
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, UK. rcote@ebi.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: With the vast amounts of biomedical data being generated by 
high-throughput analysis methods, controlled vocabularies and ontologies are 
becoming increasingly important to annotate units of information for ease of 
search and retrieval. Each scientific community tends to create its own locally 
available ontology. The interfaces to query these ontologies tend to vary from 
group to group. We saw the need for a centralized location to perform controlled 
vocabulary queries that would offer both a lightweight web-accessible user 
interface as well as a consistent, unified SOAP interface for automated queries.
RESULTS: The Ontology Lookup Service (OLS) was created to integrate publicly 
available biomedical ontologies into a single database. All modified ontologies 
are updated daily. A list of currently loaded ontologies is available online. 
The database can be queried to obtain information on a single term or to browse 
a complete ontology using AJAX. Auto-completion provides a user-friendly search 
mechanism. An AJAX-based ontology viewer is available to browse a complete 
ontology or subsets of it. A programmatic interface is available to query the 
webservice using SOAP. The service is described by a WSDL descriptor file 
available online. A sample Java client to connect to the webservice using SOAP 
is available for download from SourceForge. All OLS source code is publicly 
available under the open source Apache Licence.
CONCLUSION: The OLS provides a user-friendly single entry point for publicly 
available ontologies in the Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) format. It can be 
accessed interactively or programmatically at 
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ontology-lookup/.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-97
PMCID: PMC1420335
PMID: 16507094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]