95. Int J Med Inform. 2019 Jun;126:35-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.02.006. Epub 
2019 Mar 13.

EMIF Catalogue: A collaborative platform for sharing and reusing biomedical 
data.

Oliveira JL(1), Trifan A(2), Bastião Silva LA(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Aveiro, DETI/IEETA, Portugal. Electronic address: jlo@ua.pt.
(2)University of Aveiro, DETI/IEETA, Portugal. Electronic address: 
alina.trifan@ua.pt.
(3)BMD Software, Aveiro, Portugal. Electronic address: bastiao@bmd-software.com.

OBJECTIVE: The collaboration and knowledge exchange between researchers are 
often hindered by the nonexistence of accurate information about which databases 
may support research studies. Even though a considerable amount of patient 
health information does exist, it is usually distributed and hidden in many 
institutions. The goal of this project is to provide, for any research 
community, a holistic view of biomedical datasets of interests, from which 
researchers can explore several distinct levels of granularity.
METHODS: We developed a community-centered approach to facilitate data sharing 
while ensuring privacy. A dynamic schema allows exposing any metadata model 
about existing repositories. The framework was developed following a modular 
plugin-based architecture that facilitates the integration of internal and 
external tools.
RESULTS: The EMIF Catalogue, a web platform for sharing and reusing biomedical 
data. Through this system, data custodians can publish and share different 
levels of information, while the researchers can search for databases that 
fulfill research requirements.
CONCLUSIONS: The EMIF Catalogue currently fosters several distinct research 
communities, with different levels of data governance, combining, for instance, 
data available in pan-European EHR and Alzheimer cohorts. This portal is 
publicly available at https://emif-catalogue.eu.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2019.02.006
PMID: 31029262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]