463. Bioinformatics. 2008 Aug 15;24(16):i126-132. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn299.

Inter-species normalization of gene mentions with GNAT.

Hakenberg J(1), Plake C, Leaman R, Schroeder M, Gonzalez G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. joerg.hakenberg@asu.edu

MOTIVATION: Text mining in the biomedical domain aims at helping researchers to 
access information contained in scientific publications in a faster, easier and 
more complete way. One step towards this aim is the recognition of named 
entities and their subsequent normalization to database identifiers. 
Normalization helps to link objects of potential interest, such as genes, to 
detailed information not contained in a publication; it is also key for 
integrating different knowledge sources. From an information retrieval 
perspective, normalization facilitates indexing and querying. Gene mention 
normalization (GN) is particularly challenging given the high ambiguity of gene 
names: they refer to orthologous or entirely different genes, are named after 
phenotypes and other biomedical terms, or they resemble common English words.
RESULTS: We present the first publicly available system, GNAT, reported to 
handle inter-species GN. Our method uses extensive background knowledge on genes 
to resolve ambiguous names to EntrezGene identifiers. It performs comparably to 
single-species approaches proposed by us and others. On a benchmark set derived 
from BioCreative 1 and 2 data that contains genes from 13 species, GNAT achieves 
an F-measure of 81.4% (90.8% precision at 73.8% recall). For the single-species 
task, we report an F-measure of 85.4% on human genes.
AVAILABILITY: A web-frontend is available at http://cbioc.eas.asu.edu/gnat/. 
GNAT will also be available within the BioCreativeMetaService project, see 
http://bcms.bioinfo.cnio.es.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The test data set, lexica, and links toexternal data 
are available at http://cbioc.eas.asu.edu/gnat/

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn299
PMID: 18689813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]