512. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2019 Dec;45(12):822-828. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcjq.2019.10.002. Epub 2019 Oct 28.

AHRQ EPC Series on Improving Translation of Evidence: Use of a Clinical Pathway 
for C. Difficile Treatment to Facilitate the Translation of Research Findings 
into Practice.

Flores EJ(1), Jue JJ(2), Giradi G(3), Schoelles K(4), Mull NK(5), Umscheid 
CA(6).

Author information:
(1)is Penn Pathways Program Manager, Penn Medicine Center for Evidence-based 
Practice, University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia. Electronic 
address: emilia.flores@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(2)is formerly Medical Director, ECRI Guidelines Trust, ECRI Institute, is 
Adjunct Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia.
(3)is Project Coordinator, ECRI Institute, Plymouth Meeting, Pennslyvania.
(4)is Vice President, Clinical Excellence and Safety, ECRI Institute.
(5)is Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, and Director, Penn Medicine Center for 
Evidence-based Practice.
(6)is Chief Quality and Innovation Officer, Vice President for Healthcare 
Delivery Science, and Director of the Center for Healthcare Delivery Science and 
Innovation, University of Chicago Medicine.

BACKGROUND: In 2018 the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
Evidence-based Practice Center (EPC) Program issued a call for strategies to 
disseminate AHRQ EPC systematic reviews. In this pilot, findings from the 2016 
AHRQ EPC report on Clostridioides difficile infection were translated into a 
treatment pathway and disseminated via a cloud-based platform and electronic 
health record (EHR).
METHODS: An existing 10-step framework was used for developing and disseminating 
evidence-based clinical pathways. The development of the EHR intervention was 
informed by the Five Rights model for clinical decision support and 
human-computer interaction design heuristics. The researchers used observations 
and time measurements to describe the impact of the EPC report on pathway 
development and examined provider adoption using counts of pathway views.
RESULTS: Two main themes emerged: (1) discrepancies between the EPC report and 
existing guidelines prompted critical discussions about available treatments, 
and (2) lack of guideline and pathway syntheses in the EPC report necessitated a 
rapid literature review. Pathway development required 340 hours: 205 for the 
rapid literature review, 63 for pathway development and EHR intervention design, 
and 5 for technical implementation of the intervention. Pathways were viewed 
1,069 times through the cloud-based platform and 47 times through a hyperlink 
embedded in key EHR ordering screens.
CONCLUSION: Pathways can be an approach for disseminating AHRQ EPC report 
findings within health care systems; however, reports should include guideline 
and pathway syntheses to meet their full potential. Embedding hyperlinks to 
pathway content within the EHR may be a viable and low-effort solution for 
promoting awareness of evidence-based resources.

Copyright © 2019 The Joint Commission. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjq.2019.10.002
PMID: 31672660