287. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2014 Sep-Oct;21(5):866-70. doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002601. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Assessing the similarity of surface linguistic features related to epilepsy 
across pediatric hospitals.

Connolly B(1), Matykiewicz P(1), Bretonnel Cohen K(2), Standridge SM(3), Glauser 
TA(3), Dlugos DJ(4), Koh S(5), Tham E(6), Pestian J(1).

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Hospital Medical Center, Division of 
Bioinformatics, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Biomedical Text Mining Group, 
Computational Bioscience Program, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pediatric 
Neurology, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Child Neurology, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)University of Colorado/Children's Hospital Colorado, Division of Pediatric 
Neurology, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(6)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA Children's Hospital Colorado, Research Informatics, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The constant progress in computational linguistic methods provides 
amazing opportunities for discovering information in clinical text and enables 
the clinical scientist to explore novel approaches to care. However, these new 
approaches need evaluation. We describe an automated system to compare 
descriptions of epilepsy patients at three different organizations: Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital, the Children's Hospital Colorado, and the Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia. To our knowledge, there have been no similar previous 
studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this work, a support vector machine (SVM)-based 
natural language processing (NLP) algorithm is trained to classify epilepsy 
progress notes as belonging to a patient with a specific type of epilepsy from a 
particular hospital. The same SVM is then used to classify notes from another 
hospital. Our null hypothesis is that an NLP algorithm cannot be trained using 
epilepsy-specific notes from one hospital and subsequently used to classify 
notes from another hospital better than a random baseline classifier. The 
hypothesis is tested using epilepsy progress notes from the three hospitals.
RESULTS: We are able to reject the null hypothesis at the 95% level. It is also 
found that classification was improved by including notes from a second hospital 
in the SVM training sample.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: With a reasonably uniform epilepsy vocabulary and an 
NLP-based algorithm able to use this uniformity to classify epilepsy progress 
notes across different hospitals, we can pursue automated comparisons of patient 
conditions, treatments, and diagnoses across different healthcare settings.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002601
PMCID: PMC4147613
PMID: 24692393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]