300. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 28;4(7):e6393. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006393.

Large scale application of neural network based semantic role labeling for 
automated relation extraction from biomedical texts.

Barnickel T(1), Weston J, Collobert R, Mewes HW, Stümpflen V.

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
(MIPS), Neuherberg, Germany. thorsten.barnickel@helmholtz-muenchen.de

To reduce the increasing amount of time spent on literature search in the life 
sciences, several methods for automated knowledge extraction have been 
developed. Co-occurrence based approaches can deal with large text corpora like 
MEDLINE in an acceptable time but are not able to extract any specific type of 
semantic relation. Semantic relation extraction methods based on syntax trees, 
on the other hand, are computationally expensive and the interpretation of the 
generated trees is difficult. Several natural language processing (NLP) 
approaches for the biomedical domain exist focusing specifically on the 
detection of a limited set of relation types. For systems biology, generic 
approaches for the detection of a multitude of relation types which in addition 
are able to process large text corpora are needed but the number of systems 
meeting both requirements is very limited. We introduce the use of SENNA 
("Semantic Extraction using a Neural Network Architecture"), a fast and accurate 
neural network based Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) program, for the large scale 
extraction of semantic relations from the biomedical literature. A comparison of 
processing times of SENNA and other SRL systems or syntactical parsers used in 
the biomedical domain revealed that SENNA is the fastest Proposition Bank 
(PropBank) conforming SRL program currently available. 89 million biomedical 
sentences were tagged with SENNA on a 100 node cluster within three days. The 
accuracy of the presented relation extraction approach was evaluated on two test 
sets of annotated sentences resulting in precision/recall values of 0.71/0.43. 
We show that the accuracy as well as processing speed of the proposed semantic 
relation extraction approach is sufficient for its large scale application on 
biomedical text. The proposed approach is highly generalizable regarding the 
supported relation types and appears to be especially suited for 
general-purpose, broad-scale text mining systems. The presented approach bridges 
the gap between fast, co-occurrence-based approaches lacking semantic relations 
and highly specialized and computationally demanding NLP approaches.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006393
PMCID: PMC2712690
PMID: 19636432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.