589. JMIR Med Inform. 2018 Apr 24;6(2):e28. doi: 10.2196/medinform.7710.

Developing a Third-Party Analytics Application Using Australia's National 
Personal Health Records System: Case Study.

Bidargaddi N(1)(2), van Kasteren Y(3), Musiat P(1), Kidd M(4).

Author information:
(1)Digital Psychiatry & Personal Health Informatics Lab, College of Medicine and 
Public Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia.
(2)South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaid, Australia.
(3)Flinders Digital Health Centre, College of Nursing and Health Sciences, 
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia.
(4)Department of Family & Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: My Health Record (MyHR) is Australia's national electronic health 
record (EHR) system. Poor usability and functionality have resulted in low 
utility, affecting enrollment and participation rates by both patients and 
clinicians alike. Similar to apps on mobile phone app stores, innovative 
third-party applications of MyHR platform data can enhance the usefulness of the 
platform, but there is a paucity of research into the processes involved in 
developing third-party applications that integrate and use data from EHR 
systems.
OBJECTIVE: The research describes the challenges involved in pioneering the 
development of a patient and clinician Web-based software application for MyHR 
and insights resulting from this experience.
METHODS: This research uses a case study approach, investigating the development 
and implementation of Actionable Intime Insights (AI2), a third-party 
application for MyHR, which translates Medicare claims records stored in MyHR 
into a clinically meaningful timeline visualization of health data for both 
patients and clinicians. This case study identifies the challenges encountered 
by the Personal Health Informatics team from Flinders University in the MyHR 
third-party application development environment.
RESULTS: The study presents a nuanced understanding of different data types and 
quality of data in MyHR and the complexities associated with developing 
secondary-use applications. Regulatory requirements associated with utilization 
of MyHR data, restrictions on visualizations of data, and processes of testing 
third-party applications were encountered during the development of the 
application.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified several processes, technical and regulatory 
barriers which, if addressed, can make MyHR a thriving ecosystem of health 
applications. It clearly identifies opportunities and considerations for the 
Australian Digital Health Agency and other national bodies wishing to encourage 
the development of new and innovative use cases for national EHRs.

©Niranjan Bidargaddi, Yasmin van Kasteren, Peter Musiat, Michael Kidd. 
Originally published in JMIR Medical Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 
24.04.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.7710
PMCID: PMC5941094
PMID: 29691211

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.