178. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2012 Apr 30;12 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S5. doi: 
10.1186/1472-6947-12-S1-S5.

Semantic text mining support for lignocellulose research.

Meurs MJ(1), Murphy C, Morgenstern I, Butler G, Powlowski J, Tsang A, Witte R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia 
University, Montréal, QC, Canada. mjmeurs@encs.concordia.ca

BACKGROUND: Biofuels produced from biomass are considered to be promising 
sustainable alternatives to fossil fuels. The conversion of lignocellulose into 
fermentable sugars for biofuels production requires the use of enzyme cocktails 
that can efficiently and economically hydrolyze lignocellulosic biomass. As many 
fungi naturally break down lignocellulose, the identification and 
characterization of the enzymes involved is a key challenge in the research and 
development of biomass-derived products and fuels. One approach to meeting this 
challenge is to mine the rapidly-expanding repertoire of microbial genomes for 
enzymes with the appropriate catalytic properties.
RESULTS: Semantic technologies, including natural language processing, 
ontologies, semantic Web services and Web-based collaboration tools, promise to 
support users in handling complex data, thereby facilitating knowledge-intensive 
tasks. An ongoing challenge is to select the appropriate technologies and 
combine them in a coherent system that brings measurable improvements to the 
users. We present our ongoing development of a semantic infrastructure in 
support of genomics-based lignocellulose research. Part of this effort is the 
automated curation of knowledge from information on fungal enzymes that is 
available in the literature and genome resources.
CONCLUSIONS: Working closely with fungal biology researchers who manually curate 
the existing literature, we developed ontological natural language processing 
pipelines integrated in a Web-based interface to assist them in two main tasks: 
mining the literature for relevant knowledge, and at the same time providing 
rich and semantically linked information.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-12-S1-S5
PMCID: PMC3339392
PMID: 22595090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]