45. JCO Clin Cancer Inform. 2019 Aug;3:1-9. doi: 10.1200/CCI.19.00043.

Validation of a Semiautomated Natural Language Processing-Based Procedure for 
Meta-Analysis of Cancer Susceptibility Gene Penetrance.

Deng Z(1), Yin K(1), Bao Y(2), Armengol VD(1), Wang C(3)(4), Tiwari A(1), 
Barzilay R(2), Parmigiani G(3)(4), Braun D(3)(4), Hughes KS(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(2)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA.
(3)Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA.
(4)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

PURPOSE: Quantifying the risk of cancer associated with pathogenic mutations in 
germline cancer susceptibility genes-that is, penetrance-enables the 
personalization of preventive management strategies. Conducting a meta-analysis 
is the best way to obtain robust risk estimates. We have previously developed a 
natural language processing (NLP) -based abstract classifier which classifies 
abstracts as relevant to penetrance, prevalence of mutations, both, or neither. 
In this work, we evaluate the performance of this NLP-based procedure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared the semiautomated NLP-based procedure, which 
involves automated abstract classification and text mining, followed by human 
review of identified studies, with the traditional procedure that requires human 
review of all studies. Ten high-quality gene-cancer penetrance meta-analyses 
spanning 16 gene-cancer associations were used as the gold standard by which to 
evaluate the performance of our procedure. For each meta-analysis, we evaluated 
the number of abstracts that required human review (workload) and the ability to 
identify the studies that were included by the authors in their quantitative 
analysis (coverage).
RESULTS: Compared with the traditional procedure, the semiautomated NLP-based 
procedure led to a lower workload across all 10 meta-analyses, with an overall 
84% reduction (2,774 abstracts v 16,941 abstracts) in the amount of human review 
required. Overall coverage was 93%-we are able to identify 132 of 142 
studies-before reviewing references of identified studies. Reasons for the 10 
missed studies included blank and poorly written abstracts. After reviewing 
references, nine of the previously missed studies were identified and coverage 
improved to 99% (141 of 142 studies).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that an NLP-based procedure can significantly reduce 
the review workload without compromising the ability to identify relevant 
studies. NLP algorithms have promising potential for reducing human efforts in 
the literature review process.

DOI: 10.1200/CCI.19.00043
PMCID: PMC6873944
PMID: 31419182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I = Immediate Family 
Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate to the subject 
matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's conflict of 
interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or ascopubs.org/jco/site/ifc. 
REGINA BARZILAY: Honoraria: Merck Consulting or Advisory Role: Janssen Research 
Funding: Bayer, Amgen GIOVANNI PARMIGIANI: Leadership: Phaeno Biotech Stock and 
Other Ownership Interests: HRA Health Consulting or Advisory Role: Biogen, 
Konica Minolta Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Patent: Genetic 
Alterations in Malignant Gliomas, copyright: BayesMendel Software (Inst) Expert 
Testimony: Natera Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Konica Minolta KEVIN S. 
HUGHES: Stock and Other Ownership Interests: Hughes riskApps Honoraria: Focal 
Therapeutics, 23andMe, Hologic Consulting or Advisory Role: Health Beacons No 
other potential conflicts of interest were reported.