266. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2008;141:139-45.

Open source electronic health record and patient data management system for 
intensive care.

Massaut J(1), Reper P.

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care, Brugmann Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium. 
jacques.massaut@chu-brugmann.be

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In Intensive Care Units, the amount of data to be 
processed for patients care, the turn over of the patients, the necessity for 
reliability and for review processes indicate the use of Patient Data Management 
Systems (PDMS) and electronic health records (EHR). To respond to the needs of 
an Intensive Care Unit and not to be locked with proprietary software, we 
developed a PDMS and EHR based on open source software and components.
METHODS: The software was designed as a client-server architecture running on 
the Linux operating system and powered by the PostgreSQL data base system. The 
client software was developed in C using GTK interface library. The application 
offers to the users the following functions: medical notes captures, 
observations and treatments, nursing charts with administration of medications, 
scoring systems for classification, and possibilities to encode medical 
activities for billing processes.
RESULTS: Since his deployment in February 2004, the PDMS was used to care more 
than three thousands patients with the expected software reliability and 
facilitated data management and review processes. Communications with other 
medical software were not developed from the start, and are realized by the use 
of the Mirth HL7 communication engine. Further upgrade of the system will 
include multi-platform support, use of typed language with static analysis, and 
configurable interface.
CONCLUSION: The developed system based on open source software components was 
able to respond to the medical needs of the local ICU environment. The use of 
OSS for development allowed us to customize the software to the preexisting 
organization and contributed to the acceptability of the whole system.

PMID: 18953134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]