302. Home Healthc Now. 2019 Jul/Aug;37(4):222-226. doi: 10.1097/NHH.0000000000000779.

Feasibility Testing of Health Information Technology: Enabled Patient-Reported 
Outcome Measurement in the Home Health Setting.

Nyirenda J(1), Sun C, Wright S, Rezek G.

Author information:
(1)Joshua Nyirenda, PhD, MPA, is Director of Science, Quality Insights, 
Richmond, Virginia. Cynthia Sun, MSN, is a Lead Project Coordinator, Quality 
Insights, Charleston, West Virginia. Shanen Wright, BA, is Director of 
Innovation, Quality Insights, Charleston, West Virginia. Gary Rezek, BS, is a 
Senior Health Research Analyst, Quality Insights, Charleston, West Virginia.

The use of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs) to improve patient 
outcomes, communication, and shared decision-making is of significance to home 
healthcare. Clinicians have begun to integrate health information technology 
(HIT) enabled PROM platforms (such as tablets) into routine care to facilitate 
collection of PROMs. To evaluate the feasibility and suitability of 
incorporating PROMs into the overall workflow in home healthcare, and 
integrating data collected with electronic health records (EHRs), we engaged two 
home healthcare agencies as pilot sites over the course of 4 months. We provided 
tablets enabled with an app version of the validated Patient-Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System to collect patient data. This was followed by 
surveys, interviews, and observations on aspects of feasibility, which we 
analyzed using summary statistics and qualitative analysis. Results show that 
the implementation of the HIT-enabled PROMs in the home healthcare setting is 
suitable for workflow, without negatively impacting goals of care. Additionally, 
the tablets were considered user-friendly by both clinicians and patients. Key 
to the utility of HIT-enabled PROMs in home healthcare is the integration of the 
data collected with existing data systems, in order to facilitate quality and 
improve outcomes, the success of which can depend on EHR platform ownership and 
the related ability or access to modify EHRs.

DOI: 10.1097/NHH.0000000000000779
PMID: 31274585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]