174. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Mar 1;12:65. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-65.

CSI-OMIM--Clinical Synopsis Search in OMIM.

Cohen R(1), Gefen A, Elhadad M, Birk OS.

Author information:
(1)The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for 
Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel. 
cohenrap@bgu.ac.il

BACKGROUND: The OMIM database is a tool used daily by geneticists. Syndrome 
pages include a Clinical Synopsis section containing a list of known phenotypes 
comprising a clinical syndrome. The phenotypes are in free text and different 
phrases are often used to describe the same phenotype, the differences 
originating in spelling variations or typing errors, varying sentence structures 
and terminological variants.These variations hinder searching for syndromes or 
using the large amount of phenotypic information for research purposes. In 
addition, negation forms also create false positives when searching the textual 
description of phenotypes and induce noise in text mining applications.
DESCRIPTION: Our method allows efficient and complete search of OMIM phenotypes 
as well as improved data-mining of the OMIM phenome. Applying natural language 
processing, each phrase is tagged with additional semantic information using 
UMLS and MESH. Using a grammar based method, annotated phrases are clustered 
into groups denoting similar phenotypes. These groups of synonymous expressions 
enable precise search, as query terms can be matched with the many variations 
that appear in OMIM, while avoiding over-matching expressions that include the 
query term in a negative context. On the basis of these clusters, we computed 
pair-wise similarity among syndromes in OMIM. Using this new similarity measure, 
we identified 79,770 new connections between syndromes, an average of 16 new 
connections per syndrome. Our project is Web-based and available at 
http://fohs.bgu.ac.il/s2g/csiomim
CONCLUSIONS: The resulting enhanced search functionality provides clinicians 
with an efficient tool for diagnosis. This search application is also used for 
finding similar syndromes for the candidate gene prioritization tool S2G.The 
enhanced OMIM database we produced can be further used for bioinformatics 
purposes such as linking phenotypes and genes based on syndrome similarities and 
the known genes in Morbidmap.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-65
PMCID: PMC3053257
PMID: 21362185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]